
Umberto Eco
The Name of the Rose
NATURALLY, A MANUSCRIPT

PREFACE
ON AUGUST 16, 1968, I WAS HANDED A BOOK WRITTEN by a certain Abbé Vallet, Le Manuscrit de Dorn 
Adson de Melk, troduit en fransois d‘aprés I'édition de Dorn J. Mabillon (Aux Presses de l'Abbaye 
de la Source, Paris, 1842). Supplemented by historical information †ha† was actually qui†e scant, 
the book claimed to reproduce faithfully q fourteenth-century manuscript that, in its turn, hqd 
been found in †he monastery of Melk by †he greo† eigh†een†h-century man of leorning, †o whom we owe 
so much information about the history of the Benedictine order. The scholarly discovery (I mean 
mine, the third in chronological order) entertained me while I was in Prague, waiting for a dear 
friend. Six days later Soviet troops invaded that unhappy city. I managed, not without adventure, 
to reach the Austrian border at Linz, and from there I journeyed to Vienna, where I met my beloved, 
ond together we sailed up the Danube.

In a state of intellectual excitement, I read with fascination the terrible story of Adso of Melk, 
and I allowed myself †o be so ctbsorbed by i† †ha†, almos† in a single burs† of energy, I completed 
a translation, usin9some of those large notebooks from the Papeterie Joseph Gibert in which it is 
so pleasant to write if you use a felt-tip pen. And as I was writing, we reached the vicinity of 
Melk, where, perched over a bend in the river, the handsome Stilt stands to this day, after several
restorcttions during the course of the centuries. As the reader must have guessed, in the monastery 
library I found no †race of Adso's manuscrip†.
Before we reached Salzburg, one tragic night in a little hotel on the shores of the Mondsee, my 
traveling-companionship was abruptly interrupted, and the person with whom I was traveling 
disappeared—†aking Abbé Valle†’s book, no† ou† of spi†e, bu† because of †he abrup† and un†idy way 
in which our relationship ended. And so I was left with a number of manuscript notebooks in my 
hand, and a great emptiness in my heart.
A few months later, in Paris, I decided to 9et to the bottom of my research. Among the few pieces 
of
information I had derived from the French book, I still had the reference to its source, 
exceptionally
detailed and precise:

Ve†erq anctIec†q, sive coIIec†io ve†erum aliquo† operum 6 opusculorum omms genesis, carminum, 
epis†oIarum, dipIoma†on, epi†aphiorum, 4, cum i†inere germanico, adno†a†ionibus 6 aliquo† 
disquisitionibus R.PD. Joannis Mabillon, Presbiteri ac Monachi Ord. Sancti Benedicti e 
Congregatione S. Mauri—Nova Editio cui accessere Mabiloii vita d‹ aliquot opuscula, scilicet 
Dissertatio de Pane Euchoristico, Azymo et Fermentato ad Eminentiss. Cardinalem Bona. Subiungitur 
opusculum Eldefonsi Hispaniensis Episcopi de eodem argumento Et Eusebii Romani ad Theophilum Gallum 
epistola, De cultu sanctorum ignotorum, Parisiis, apud Levesque, ad Pontem S. Michaelis, MDCCXXI, 
cum privilegio Regis.



I quickly found the Vetera analecta at the Bibliothéque Sainte Geneviéve, but to my great surprise 
the edition I came upon differed from the description in two details: first, the publisher, who was 
given here as "Montalant, ad Ripam P.P. Augustinianorum (prope Pontem S. Michaelis)," and also the 
date, which was two years later. I needn't add that these analectct did not comprehend any 
manuscript of Adso or Adson of Melk: on the contrary, as anyone interested can check, they are a 
collection of brief or medium-length texts, whereas the story transcribed by Vallet ran to several 
hundred pages. At the same time, I consulted illustrious medievalists such as the dear and 
unforgettable Etienne Gilson, but it was evident that the only Vetera onalecta were those I had 
seen at Sointe Geneviéve. A quick trip to the Abbaye de la Source, in the vicinity of Passy, and a 
conversation with my friend Dorn Arne Lohnes†ed† further convinced me †ha† no Abbé Valle† had 
published books on †he abbey's presses (for thot matter, nonexistent). French scholars ore 
notoriously careless about furnishing reliable bibliographical information, bu† †his case wen† 
beyond all reasonable pessimism. I began †o †hink I had encountered a forgery. By now the Vallet 
volume itself could not be recovered (or at least I didn't dare go and ask it back from the person 
who had taken it from me). I had only my notes left, and I was beginning †o have doub†s abou† †hem.

There are magic moments, involving great physical fatigue and intense motor excitement, that 
produce visions of people known in the past (“en me retra5ant ces détails, j'en suis a me demanded 
s‘iIs sont réels, ou bien si je les ai revés”). As I learned later from the delightful little book 
of the Abbé de Bucquoy, †here are also visions of books qs ye† unwri††en.

If something new had not occurred, I would still be wondering where the story of Adso of Melk 
originated: but then, in 1970, in Buenos Aires, as I was browsing among the shelves of a little 
antiquarian bookseller on Corrientes, not far from the more illustrious Patio del Tango of that 
great street, I cctme upon the Cctstilian version of a little work by MiIo Temesvar, On the Use of 
Mirrors in the Game of Chess. It was an Italian translation of the original, which, now impossible 
to find, was in Georgian (Tbilisi, 1934); and here, to my great surprise, I read copious quotations 
from Adso‘s manuscript, though the source was neither Vallet nor Mabillon; it was Father Athanasius 
Kircher (but which work*). A scholar—whom I prefer not to nqme—later assured me that (qnd he quoted 
indexes from memory) the great Jesuit never mentioned Adso of Melk. But Temesvar's pages were 
before my eyes, and the episodes he cited were the same as those of the Vallet manuscript (the 
description of
†he labyrinth in particular lef† no room for doub†).
I concluded thctt Adso‘s memoirs appropriately share the nature of the events he narrates: shrouded 
in many, shadowy mysteries, beginning wi†h †he iden†i†y of †he au†hor and ending wi†h †he abbey's 
location, abou† which Adso is stubbornly, scrupulously silen†. Conjecture allows us †o designate a 
vague area between Pomposa and Conques, with reasonable likelihood thot the community was somewhere
along the central ridge of the Apennines, between Piedmont, Li9Uria, and France. As for the period 
in which the events described take place, we are at the end of November 1327; the date of the 
author's writing, on the other hand, is uncertain. Inasmuch as he describes himself as a novice in 
1327 and says he is close to death as he writes his memoirs, we can calculate roughly that the 
manuscript was written in the last or next-to-last decade of the fourteenth century.


On sober reflection, I find few reasons for publishing my Italian version of an obscure, neo-Go†hic 
French version of a seventeenth-century Latin edition of a work written in Latin by o German monk 
toward the end of the fourteenth century.

First of all, what style should I employ* The temptation to follow Itctlian models of the period 
had to be rejected as totally unjustified: not only does Adso write in Latin, but it is also clear 
from the whole development of the text that his culture (or the culture of the abbey, which clearly 
influences him) dates back even further; it is manifestly a summation, over several centuries, of 
learning and stylistic quirks that con be linked with the late-medieval Latin tradition. Adso 
thinks and writes like a monk
who has remained impervious to the revolution of the vernacular, still bound to the pages housed in 
the library he tells about, educated on patristic-scholastic texts; and his story (apart from the 
fourteenth-century references and events, which Adso reports with countless perplexities and always 
by hearsay) could have been written, as far as the language and the learned quotations go, in the 
twelfth or thirteenth century.

On the other hand, there is no doubt that, in translating Adso‘s Latin into his own neo-Gothic 
French, Vallet took some liberties, and not only stylistic liberties. For example, the chctrctcters 
speqk sometimes of †he properties of herbs, clearly referring †o †he book of secrets a††ribu†ed †o 
Alber†us Magnus, which underwent countless revisions over the centuries. It is certain that Adso 
knew the work, but the fact remains that passages he quotes from it echo too literally both 
formulas of Paracelsus and obvious interpolations from an edition of Albertus unquestionably dating 
from the Tudor period.[1] However, I discovered later that during the time when Vallet was 
transcribing (*) the manuscript of Adso, there was circulating in Paris an eighteenth century 
edition of the Grand and the Petit Albert,[2] now irreparably corrupt. In any case, how could I be 
sure that the text known to Adso or the monks whose discussions he recorded did not also contain, 
among glosses, scholio, and various appendices, annotations thctt would go on to enrich subsequent 
scholarship*

Finally, was I to retain in Latin the passages that Abbé Vallet himself did not feel it opportune 
to translate, perhaps to preserve the ambience of the period* There were no particular reasons to 
do so, except a perhaps misplaced sense of fidelity to my source.  I have eliminated excesses, but 
I hqve
retained a certain amount. And I fear that I have imitated those bad novelists who, introducing a 
French character, make him exclaim "Parbleu!“ and "La femme, ah! la femme!“

In shor†, I am full of doubts. I really don’† know why I have decided to pluck up my courage and 
present, as if it were authentic, the manuscript of Adso of Melk. Let us say it is an act of love. 
Or, if you like, a way of ridding myself of numerous, persistent obsessions.

I transcribe my †ex† with no concern for timeliness. In the years when I discovered the Abbé Valle† 
volume, there was a widespread conviction that one should write only out of a commitment to the 
present, in order to change the world. Now, after ten years or more, the man of letters (restored 
to his loftiest dignity) can happily write out of pure love of writing. And so I now feel free to 
tell, for sheer narrative pleasure, the story of Adso of Melk, and I am comforted and consoled in 
finding it immeasurably remote in time (now that the waking of reason has dispelled all the 
monsters that its sleep had generated), gloriously lacking in any relevance for our day, 
atemporally alien to our hopes and our certainties.


For it is a tale of books, not of everyday worries, and reading it can lead us to recite, with â 
Kempis, the great imitator: “In omnibus requiem quaesivi, et nusquam inveni nisi in ongulo cum 
libro.”

January 5, 1980

[1] Liber oggrega†ionis seu liber secre†orum Alber†i Mogni, Londinium, jux†a pon†em qui vulgori†er 
dicitur Flete brigge, MCCXCLXXXV.

[2] Les Admirobles Secrets d'AIbert Ie Grand, A Lyon, Chez les Héritiers Beringos, Fromes, a 
l'Enseigne d'Agrippa, MDCCLXXV; Secrets merveilleux de la magie naturelle et cabalistique du Petit 
Albert, A Lyon, Chez les Héritiers Beringos, Frames, a l'Enseigne d'Agrippa, MDCCXXIX.

NOTE

ADSO‘S MANUSCRIPT IS DIVIDED INTO SEVEN DAYS, AND each day into periods corresponding
†o †he Ii†urgicqI hours. The sub†i†Ies, in †he †hird person, were probably added by Valle†. Bu† 
since they are helpful in orienting the reader, and since this usage is also not unknown to much of 
the vernacular literature of the period, I did not feel it necessary to eliminate them.

Adso's references to the canonical hours caused me some puzzlement, because their meaning varied 
according to the ploce and the season: moreover, it is entirely probable that in the fourteenth 
century the instructions given by Saint Benedict in the Rule were not observed with absolute 
precision.

Nevertheless, as a guide to the reader, the following schedule is, I believe, credible. It is 
partly deduced from †he †ex† and par†Iy bctsed on a comparison of †he original Rule wi†h †he 
description of monastic life given by Edouard Schneider in Les Heures bénédictines (Paris, Grassed, 
1925).

Motins - (which Adso sometimes refers to by the older expression “Vigiliae”) Between 2:30 and 3:00 
in the morning.

Lauds - (which in the most ancient tradition were called “Matutini” or “Matins”) Between 5:00 and 
6:00 in the morning, in order to end at dawn.

Prime - Around 7:30, shortly before daybreak. Terce Around 9:00.

Sext - Noon (in a monastery where the monks did not work in the fields, it was also the hour of the 
middoy meal in win†er).
Nones - Between 2:00 and 3:00 in the afternoon.
Vespers - Around 4:30, at sunset (the Rule prescribes eating supper before dark). Compline - Around 
6:00 (before 7:00, the monks go to bed).


The calculation is based on the fact that in northern Italy at the end of November, the sun rises 
around 7:30 A.M. and sets around 4:40 P.M.

PROLOGUE
In the beginning was the Word and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. This was beginning 
with God and the duty of every faithful monk would be to repeat every day with chanting humility 
the one never-changing event whose incontrovertible truth can be asserted. But we see now through a 
9lassdarkly, and the truth, before it is revealed to all, face to face, we see in fra9ments(alas, 
how illegible) in the error of the world, so we must spell out its faithful signals even when they 
seem obscure to us and as if amalgamated with a will wholly bent on evil.
Having reached the end of my poor sinner's life, my hair now white, I grow old as the world does, 
waiting to be lost in the bottomless pit of silent and deserted divinity, sharing in the light of 
angelic intelligences; confined now with my heavy, ailing body in this cell in the dear monastery 
of Melk, I prepctre to leqve on this parchment my testimony as to the wondrous ctnd terrible events 
that I happened to observe in my youth, now repeating verbatim all I saw and heard, wi†hou† 
venturing to seek a design, as if to leave to those who will come after (if the Antichrist has not 
come first) signs of signs, so that the prayer of deciphering may be exercised on them.

May the Lord grant me the grace to be the transparent witness of the happenings that took place in 
the abbey whose name it is only right and pious now to omit, toward the end of the year of our Lord 
1327, when the Emperor Louis came down into Italy to restore the dignity of the Holy Roman Empire, 
in keeping with the designs of the Almighty and to the confusion of the wicked usurper, simoniac, 
and heresiarch who in Avignon brought shame on the holy name of the apostle (I refer to the sinful 
soul of Jacques of Cahors, whom the impious revered as John XXII).

Perhaps, to make more comprehensible the events in which I found myself involved, I should recall 
what wets happening in those Ictst years of the century, as I understood it then, living through 
it, and as I remember it now, complemented by other stories I heard afterward—if my memory still 
proves capable of connecting the threads of happenings so many and confused.

In the early years of that century Pope Clement V had moved the apostolic seat to Avignon, leaving 
Rome prey to the ambitions of the local overlords: and gradually the holy city of Christianity had 
been transformed into a circus, or into a brothel, riven by the struggles among its leaders; though 
called a republic, i† was no† one, and i† was assailed by armed bands, subjected †o violence and 
looking.
Ecclesiastics, eluding secular jurisdiction, commanded groups of malefactors and robed, sword in 
hand, transgressing qnd organizing evil commerce. How was i† possible †o preven† †he Capu† Mundi 
from becoming again, and rightly, the goal of the man who wanted to assume the crown of the Holy 
Roman Empire and restore the dignity of that temporal dominion that had belonged to the Caesars*
Thus in 1314 five German princes in Frankfurt elected Louis the bavarian supreme ruler of the 
empire. Bu† †ha† some day, on the opposite shore of the Main, the Coun† Palatine of the Rhine and 
the Archbishop of Cologne elected Frederick of Austria to the same high rank. Two emperors for a 
single throne and a single pope for two: a situation that, truly, fomented great disorder. ...



Two years later, in Avignon, the new Pope was elected, Jacques of Cahors, on old man of seventy-two 
who took, as I have said, the name of John XXII, and heaven grant that no pontiff take again a name 
now so distasteful to the righteous. A Frenchman, devoted to the King of France (the men of that 
corrupt land qre always inclined to foster the interests of their own people, and are unable to 
look upon the whole world as their spiritual home), he had supported Philip the Fair against the 
Knights Templars, whom the King accused (I believe unjustly) of the most shameful crimes so that he 
could seize their possessions with the complicity of that renegade ecclesiastic.

In 1322 Louis the Bavarian defeated his rival Frederick. Fearing a single emperor even more than he 
hod feored two, John excommunicoted the victor, who in return denounced the Pope as a heretic. I 
must also recall how, that very year, the chopter of the Franciscons was convened in Perugia, and 
the minister generol, Michoel of Ceseno, accepting the entreoties of the Spirituals (of whom I will 
have occasion to speak), proclaimed as a matter of faith and doctrine the poverty of Christ, who, 
if he owned something with his opostles, possessed it only as usus facti. A worthy resolution, 
meant to safeguard the virtue and purity of the order, it highly displeased the Pope, who perhaps 
discerned in it a principle that would jeopardize the very claims that he, as head of the church, 
had made, denying
†he empire †he righ† †o elec† bishops, and asserting on †he contrary †ho† †he popal †hrone hod †he 
right to invest the emperor. Moved by these or other reasons, John condemned the Franciscan 
propositions in 1323 with the decretal Cum inter nonnullos.

I† was a† †his poin†, I imagine, †ha† Louis sow †he Fronciscons, now †he Pope‘s enemies, as his 
po†en†ial allies. By affirming †he poverty of Chris†, †hey were somehow s†reng†hening †he ideas of 
†he imperial theologians, namely Marsilius of Padua and John of Jandun. And finally, not many 
months before the events I am narrating, Louis came to an agreement with the defeated Frederick, 
descended into Italy, and was crowned in Milan.

This was the situation when I—a young Benedictine novice in the monastery of Melk—was removed from 
the peace of the cloister by my father, fighting in Louis‘s train, not least among his barons. He 
thought it wise to tctke me with him so thot I might know the wonders of Italy and be present when 
the Emperor was crowned in Rome. But the siege of Pisa then absorbed him in military concerns. Left 
to myself, I roamed among the cities of Tuscany, partly out of idleness and partly out of a desire 
to learn. But this undisciplined freedom, my parents thought, was not suitable for an adolescent 
devoted to a contemplative life. And on the advice of Marsilius, who had token a liking to me, they 
decided to place me under the direction of a lectrned Franciscan, Brother William of Baskerville, 
about to undertake a mission †ha† would lead him †o famous ci†ies and ancien† abbeys. Thus I became 
William's scribe and disciple at the same time, nor did I ever regret it, because with him I was 
witness to events worthy of being handed down, as I am now doing, to those who will come after us.

I did not then know what Brother William was seeking, and to tell the truth, I still do not know 
today, and I presume he himself did not know, moved as he was solely by the desire for truth, and 
by the suspicion—which I could see he always harbored—that the truth was not what was appearing to 
him at any given moment. And perhaps during those years he had been distracted from his beloved 
studies by secular duties. The mission with which William had been charged remained unknown to me 
while we were on our journey, or, rather, he never spoke to me about it. It was only by overhearing 
bits of his conversations with the abbots of the monasteries where we stopped along the way that I 
formed some


ideq of the nature of this assignment. But I did not understand it fully until we reached our 
destination, as I will tell presently. Our destination was to the north, but our journey did not 
follow a straight line, and we rested at various abbeys. Thus it happened that we turned westward 
when our final goal was to the east, almost following the line of mountains that from Pisa leads in 
the direction of the pilgrim‘s way to Santiago, pausing in a place which the terrible events that 
took place there dissuade me from identifying more closely now, but whose lords were liege to the 
empire, and where the abbots of our order, all in agreement, opposed the heretical, corrupt Pope. 
Our journey lasted two weeks, amid various vicissitudes, and during that time I had the opportunity 
to know (never enough, I remain convinced) my new mos†er.

In †he pages †o follow I sholl no† indulge in descriptions of persons—excep† when a faciol 
expression, or a gesture, appears as a sign of a mute but eloquent longuage—because, as Boethius 
says, nothing is more fleeting than external form, which withers and alters like the flowers of the 
field at the appearance of autumn; and what would be the point of saying today that the abbot Abo 
had a stern eye and pale cheeks, when by now he ond those around him are dust and their bodies have 
the mortal groyness of dust (only their souls, God grant, shining with a light thot will never be 
extinguished)* But I would like to describe William at least once, because his singular features 
struck me, qnd it is charac†eris†ic of †he young †o become bound †o an older and wiser man no† only 
by †he spell of his words and the sharpness of his mind, but also by the superficial form of his 
body, which proves very dear, like the figure of a father, whose gestures we study and whose 
frowns, whose smile we observe—wi†hou† a shqdow of lus† †o pollute †his form (perhaps †he only †ha† 
is †ruIy pure) of corporal love.

In the past men were handsome and great (now they are children and dwarfs), but this is merely one 
of the many facts thot demonstrate the disaster of an aging world. The young no longer want to 
study anything, lectrning is in decline, the whole world walks on its hectd, blind men lectd others 
equally blind and cause †hem †o plunge in†o †he abyss, birds leave †he nes† before †hey can fly, 
†he jackass ploys the tyre, oxen dance. Mary no longer loves the contemplative life and Martha no 
longer loves the active life, Leah is sterile, Rachel has a carnal eye, Cato visits brothels, 
Lucretius becomes a woman.
Everything is on the wrong path. In those days, thank God, I acquired from my mctster the desire to 
learn and a sense of the straight way, which remains even when the path is tortuous.

Brother William's physical appearance was at that time such as to attract the attention of the most 
inattentive observer. His height surpassed thot of a normal man and he was so thin that he seemed 
still tctller. His eyes were sharp and penetrating: his thin and sIi9htIybeaky nose gave his 
countenance the expression of a man on the lookout, save in certain moments of sluggishness of 
which I shall speak. His chin also denoted a firm will, though the long face covered with 
freckles—such as I often saw
among those born between Hibernia and Northumbria—could occasionally express hesitation and 
puzzlement. In time I realized that what seemed a lack of confidence wqs only curiosity, but at the 
beginning I knew little of this virtue, which I thought, rather, a passion of the covetous spirit. 
I believed instead that the rational spirit should not indulge such passion, but feed only on the 
Truth, which (I †hough†) one knows from †he ou†se†.

Boy thot I was, I was first, and most deeply, struck by some clumps of yellowish hair thot 
protruded from his ears, and by his thick blond eyebrows. He had perhaps seen fifty springs and was 
therefore already very old, but his tireless body moved with an agility I myself often lacked. His 
energy seemed


inexhaustible when a burst of ctctivity overwhelmed him. But from time to time, qs if his vital 
spirit had something of the crayfish, he moved backward in moments of inertia, and I watched him 
lie for hours on my pallet in my cell, uttering barely a few monosyllables, without contracting a 
single muscle of his face. On those occasions a vacant, absent expression appeared in his eyes, and 
I would have suspected he wqs in †he power of some vege†aI substance capable of producing visions 
if †he obvious temperance of his life had not led me to reject this thought. I will not deny, 
however, that in the course of the journey, he sometimes stopped at the edge of a meadow, at the 
entrance to a forest, to ga†her some herb (always †he same one, I believe): and he would †hen chew 
i† wi†h an absorbed look. He kept some of it with him, and ate it in the moments of greatest 
tension (and we had a number of them at the abbey!). Once, when I asked him what it was, he said 
laughing that a good Christian can sometimes learn also from the infidels, and when I asked him to 
let me taste it, he replied that herbs thot are good for an old Franciscan are not good for a young 
Benedictine.
Durin9our time together we did not have occasion to lead a very regular life: even at the abbey we 
remained up at night and collapsed wearily during the day, nor did we take part regularly in the 
holy offices. On our journey, however, he seldom stayed awake after compline, and his habits were 
frugal. Sometimes, ctlso ctt the abbey, he would spend the whole day walking in the vegetctble 
garden, examining the plants as if they were chrysoprases or emeralds: and I sow him roaming abou† 
the treasure crypt, looking at a coffer studded with emeralds and chrysoprases as if it were a 
clump of
thorn apple. At other times he would pass an entire day in the great hall of the library, leafing 
through manuscripts as if seeking nothing but his own enjoyment (while, around us, the corpses of 
monks, horribly murdered, were multiplying). One day I found him strolling in the flower garden 
without any apparent aim, as if he did not have to account to God for his works. In my order they 
had taught me quite a different way of expending my time, and I said so to him. And he answered 
that the beauty of the cosmos derives no† only from unity in variety, bu† also from variety in 
unity. This seemed to me an answer dictated by crude common sense, but I lectrned subsequently 
thctt the men of his land often define things in ways in which it seems that the enlightening power 
of reason has scant function.
During our period at the abbey his hands were always covered with the dust of books, the gold of 
still- fresh illumination, or with yellowish substances he touched in Severinus's infirmary. He 
seemed unqble to think save with his hands, an attribute I considered then worthier of a mechanic: 
but even when his hands touched the most fragile things, such as certain freshly illuminated 
codices, or pages worn by time and friable as unleavened bread, he possessed, it seemed to me, an 
extraordinarily delicate touch, the same that he used in handling his machines. I will tell, in 
fact, how this strange man carried with him, in his bag, instruments that I hqd never seen before 
then, which he called his wondrous machines. Machines, he said, are an effect of art, which is 
nature‘s ape, and they reproduce not its forms bu† †he operation i†seIf. He explained †o me †hus 
†he wonders of †he clock, †he as†roIabe, and the magnet. But at the beginning I feared it was 
witchcraft, and I pretended to sleep on certain clear ni9htswhen he (with a strange triangle in his 
hand) stood watching the stars. The Franciscans I had known in Italy and in my own land were simple 
men, often illiterate, and I expressed to him my amazement at his learning. But he said to me, 
smiling, that the Franciscans of his island were cast in another mold: “Roger Bacon, whom I 
venerate as my master, teaches that the divine plan will one day encompass †he science of machines, 
which is natural and healthy magic. And one day i† will be possible,
by exploiting the power of nature, to create instruments of navigation by which ships will proceed 
unico homine regente, and far more rapid than those propelled by sails or oars; and there will be 
self-
propelled wagons ’and flying apparatuses of such form that a man seated in them, by turning a 
device,


can flqp artificial win9•, ad modum avis volantis. And tiny instruments will lift huge weights and 
vehicles will allow travel on the bottom of the sea.”

When I asked him where these machines were, he told me that they had already been made in ancient 
times, and some even in our own time: “Except the flying instrument, which I have never seen or 
known anyone who has seen,. but I know of a learned man who has conceived it. And bridges can be 
built across rivers without columns or other support, and other unheard-of machines are possible. 
But you must not worry if they do not yet exist, because that does not mean they will not exist 
later. And I soy to you that God wishes them to be, and certainly they already ore in His mind, 
even if my friend from Occam denies that ideas exist in such a way; and I do not say this because 
we can determine the divine na†ure bu† precisely because we canno† se† any limi† †o i†.“ Nor was 
†his †he only con†radic†ory proposition I heard him utter; but even now, when I am old and wiser 
than I was then, I have not completely understood how he could have such faith in his friend from 
Occam and at the same time swear by the words of Bacon, as he was accustomed to doing. It is also 
true that in those dark times a wise mon had to believe things that were in contradiction among 
themselves.
There, of Brother William I hqve perhaps said things without sense, qs if to collect from the very 
beginning the disjointed impressions of him thot I had then. Who he was, and what he was doing, my 
good reader, you will perhaps deduce better from the actions he performed in the days we spent in 
the abbey. Nor do I promise you an accomplished design, but, rather, a tale of events (those, yes) 
wondrous and awful.

And so, after I had come to know my master day by day, and spent the many hours of our journey in 
long conversations which, when appropriate, I will relate little by little, we reached the foot of 
the hill on which the abbey stood. And i† is time for my story to approach i†, as we did then, and 
may my hand remain steady as I prepare to tell whctt happened.
FIRST DAY PRIME
In which the foot of the abbey is reached, and William demonstrates his great acumen.
It was a beautiful morning at the end of November. During the night it had snowed, but only a 
little, and the earth was covered with a cool blanket no more than three fingers high. In the 
darkness, immediately after lauds, we heard Moss in a village in the valley. Then we se† off toward 
the mountain, as the sun first appeared.
While we toiled up the steep path that wound around the mountain, I saw the abbey. I was amazed, 
no† by †he walls †ha† girded i† on every side, similar †o o†hers †o be seen in all †he Christian 
world, bu†
by the bulk of what I later learned was the Aedificium. This was an octogonol construction thot 
from a distance seemed a tetragon (a perfect form, which expresses the sturdiness and 
impregnability of the City of God), whose southern sides stood on the plateau of the abbey, while 
the northern ones seemed
†o grow from †he s†eep side of †he mountain, a sheer drop, †o which †hey were bound. I migh† say 
†ha†


from below, at certain points, the cliff seemed to extend, reaching up toward the heavens, with the 
rock's same colors and material, which at a certain point became keep and tower (work of giants who 
had great familiarity with earth and sky). Three rows of windows proclaimed the triune rhythm of 
its elevation, so that what was physically squared on the earth was spiritually triangular in the 
sky. As we came closer, we realized that the quadrangular form included, at each of its corners, a 
heptagonal tower, five sides of which were visible on the outside—four of the eight sides, then, of 
the greater octagon producing four minor heptagons, which from the outside appeared as pentagons. 
And thus anyone can see the admirable concord of so many holy numbers, each revealing a subtle 
spiritual significance. Eight, the number of perfection for every tetragon: four, the number of the 
Gospels: five, the number of the zones of the world; seven, the number of the gifts of the Holy 
Ghost. In its bulk and in its form, the Aedificium resembled Castel Ursino or Castel del Monte, 
which I was to see later in the south of the Italian peninsula, but its inaccessible position made 
it more awesome than those, and capable of inspiring fear in the traveler who approached it 
gradually. And it was fortunate that, since it was a very clear winter morning, I did not first see 
the building as it appears on stormy days.
I will not sqy, in any case, thqt it prompted feelings of jollity. I felt fear, and a subtle 
uneasiness. God knows these were not phantoms of my immature spirit, and I was rightly interpreting 
indubitable omens inscribed in the stone the day that the giants began their work, and before the 
deluded determination of the monks dared consecrate the building to the preservation of the divine 
word.

As our little mules strove up the lost curve of the mountain, where the main path divided into 
three, producing two side paths, my master stopped for a while, to look around: at the sides of the 
road, at the road itself, and above the road, where, for a brief stretch, a series of evergreen 
pines formed a natural roof, white with snow.

"A rich abbey,” he said. "The abbo† likes a grea† display on public occasions.“

Accustomed as I was to hear him moke the most unusual declarations, I did not question him. This 
wos also because, af†er another bi† of roqd, we heard some noises, and a† †he nex† †urn an agi†q†ed 
band of monks and servants appeored. One of †hem, seeing us, come †oword us wi†h grea† cordioIi†y. 
“Welcome, sir,” he said, "and do not be surprised if I can guess who you are, because we have been 
advised of your visit. I am Remigio of Varagine, the cellarer of the monastery. And if you, as I 
believe, are Brother William of Baskerville, the abbot must be informed. You”—he commonded one of 
his pqrty—“go up and tell them that our visitor is qbout to come inside the walls."

"I thank you, Brother Cellarer,“ my master replied politely, "and I appreciate your courtesy all 
the more since, in order to greet me, you have interrupted your search. But don't worry. The horse 
came this way and took the pqth to the right. He will not get far, because he will have to stop 
when he reaches the dungheap. He is too intelligent to plunge down that precipitous slope. ”

"When did you see him*” the cellarer asked.

"We haven't seen him at all, have we, Adso*” William soid, turning toward me with an amused look. 
“gut if you are hunting for Brunellus, the horse can only be where I have said.“


The cellarer hesitated. He looked at William, then at the path, and finally qsked, “Brunellus* How 
did you know*”

“Come, come,” William said, “it is obvious you are hunting for Brunellus, the abbot's favorite 
horse, fifteen hands, the fastest in your stables, with q dqrk coat, q full tail, smqll round 
hoofs, but a very steady gait; small head, sharp ears, big eyes. He went to the right, as I said, 
but you should hurry, in any case.”

The cellarer hesitated for a moment longer, then gestured to his men and rushed off along the path 
to the right, while our mules resumed their climb. My curiosity aroused, I was about to question 
William, but he motioned me to wait: in fact, a few minutes later we heard cries of rejoicing, and 
at the turn of the path, monks and servants reappeared, leading the horse by its halter. They 
passed by us, all glancing a† us with some amazemen†, then preceded us toward the abbey. I believe 
William also slowed the pace of his mount to give them time to tell what had happened. I had 
already realized that my master, in every respect a man of the highest virtue, succumbed to the 
vice of vanity when it was a matter of demonstrating his acumen: and having learned to appreciate 
his gifts as a subtle diplomatist, I understood †ha† he wqn†ed †o reqch his des†ina†ion preceded by 
a firm repu†a†ion as a man of knowledge.
“And now tell me”—in the end I could not restrain myself—"how did you manage to know*”
“My good Adso,” my master said, “during our whole journey I have been teaching you to recognize the 
evidence through which the world speaks to us like a great book. Alanus de Insults said that
omnis mundi creatura quasi liber e† pic†ura nobis est in speculum
and he was thinking of the endless array of symbols with which God, through His creatures, speaks 
to us of the eternal life. But the universe is even more talkative than Alanus thought, and it 
speaks not only of the ultimate things (which it does always in an obscure fashion) but also of 
closer things, and then it speaks quite clearly. I am almost embarrassed to repeat to you what you 
should know. At the crossroads, on the still-fresh snow, a horse's hoofprints stood out very 
neatly, heading for the path to our left. Neatly spaced, those marks said that the hoof was small 
and round, and the gallop quite regular—and so I deduced the nature of the horse, and the fact that 
it was not running wildly like a crazed animal. At the point where the pines formed a natural roof, 
some twigs had been freshly broken off at a height of five feet. One of the blackberry bushes where 
the animal must have turned to take the path to his right, proudly switching his handsome tail, 
still held some long black horsehairs in its brambles.  You will not say, finally, that you do not 
know that path leads to the dungheap,
because as we passed †he lower curve we saw †he spill of was†e down †he sheer cliff below †he grea† 
east tower, staining the snow; and from the situation of the crossroads, the path could only lead 
in
†ho† direction.”
“Yes,” I said, “but what about the small head, the sharp ears, the big eyes *”



“I am no† sure he has †hose features, bu† no doub† †he monks firmly believe he does. As Isidore of 
Seville said, the beauty of a horse requires 'that the head be small, siccum prope pelle ossibus 
adhaerente, short and pointed ears, big eyes, flaring nostrils, erect neck, thick mane and tail, 
round and solid hoofs.’ If the horse whose passing I inferred had not rectlly been the finest of 
the stables, stobleboys would have been out chasing him, but instead, the cellarer in person had 
undertaken the search. And a monk who considers a horse excellent, whatever his natural forms, can 
only see him as the auctoritates have described him, especially if“—and here he smiled slyly in my 
direction—"the described is a learned Benedictine.”
“All right,” I said, “but why Brunellus*”

“May the Holy Ghost sharpen your mind, son!” my master exclaimed. “What other name could he 
possibly have* Why, even the 9•eatBuridan, who is about to become rector in Paris, when he wants to 
use a horse in one of his logical examples, always calls it Brunellus.”
This wets my master's way. He not only knew how to read the grectt book of nctture, but ctlso knew 
the way monks read †he books of Scripture, and how †hey †hough† through †hem. A gif† †ho†, as we 
shall see, was to prove useful to him in the days to follow. His explanation, moreover, seemed to 
me at that point so obvious that my humiliation at not having discovered it by myself was surpassed 
only by my pride at now being a sharer in it, and I was almost congratulating myself on my insight. 
Such is the power of †he †ru†h †ho†, like good, i† is i†s own propago†or. And praised be †he holy 
nome of our Lord Jesus Christ for this splendid revelation I was granted.

But resume your course, O my story, for this aging monk is lingering too long over marginalia. 
Tell, rather, how we arrived qt the great gqte of the abbey, and on the threshold stood the abbot, 
beside whom two novices held a golden basin filled with water. When we had dismounted, he washed 
William‘s hands, then embraced him, kissing him on the mouth and giving him a holy welcome.

“Thank you, Abo,” William said. “It is ct grectt joy for me to set foot in Your Magnificence‘s 
monastery, whose fame has traveled beyond these mountains. I come as a pilgrim in the name of our 
Lord, and as such you have honored me. But I come also in the name of our lord on this earth, as 
the letter I now give you will tell you, and in his name also I thank you for your welcome.”
The abbot accepted the letter with the imperial seals and replied that William‘s arrival had in any 
event been preceded by other missives from his brothers (it is difficult, I said to myself with a 
certain pride, to take a Benedictine abbot by surprise); then he asked the cellarer to take us to 
our lodgings, as the grooms led our mules away. The abbot was looking forward to visiting us later, 
when we were refreshed, qnd we entered the great courtyard where the abbey buildings extended qll 
about the gentle plain that blunted in a soft bowl—or alp—the peak of the mountain.
I shall have occasion to discuss the layout of the abbey more than once, and in greater detail. 
After the gate (which was the only opening in the outer walls) a tree-lined avenue led to the 
abbatial church. To the left of the avenue there stretched a vast area of vegetable gardens and, as 
I later learned, the botanical garden, around the two buildings of the balneary and the infirmary 
and herbarium, following the curve of the walls. Behind, to the left of the church, rose the 
Aedificium, separated


from the church by a yard scattered with graves. The north door of the church faced the south tower 
of the Aedificium, which offered, frontally, its west tower to the arriving visitor's eyes; then, 
to the left, the building joined the walls and seemed to plunge, from its towers, toward the abyss, 
over which the north tower, seen obliquely, projected. To the right of the church there were some 
buildings, sheltering in i†s lee, and o†hers around †he cloister: †he dormitory, no doub†, †he 
abbo†’s house, ctnd the pilgrims' hospice, where we were heading. We reached it after crossing a 
handsome flower garden. On the right side, beyond a broad lawn, along the south walls and 
continuing eastward behind the church, a series of peasants' quarters, stables, mills, oil presses, 
granaries, and cellars, and what seemed to me to be the novices' house. The regular terrain, only 
slightly rolling, had allowed the ancient builders of that holy place to respect the rules of 
orientation, better than Honorius Augustoduniensis or Guillaume Durant could have demanded. From 
the position of the sun at that hour of the day, I noticed that the main church door opened 
perfectly westward, so choir and altar were facing east; and the good morning sun, in rising, could 
directly wake the monks in the dormitory and
†he animals in †he stables. I never saw an abbey more beautiful or be††er oriented, even †hough 
subsequently I sow St. Gall, and Cluny, and Fontenay, and others still, perhaps larger but less 
well proportioned. Unlike the others, this one was remarkable for the exceptional size of the 
Aedificium. I did not possess the experience of a master builder, but I immediately realized it was 
much older than
†he buildings surrounding i†. Perhaps i† had originated for some o†her purposes, and †he abbey's 
compound had been laid ou† around i† a† a Ia†er †ime, bu† in such a way †ha† †he orien†a†ion of †he 
huge building should conform with that of the church, and the church's with its. For architecture, 
among all the arts, is the one that most boldly tries to reproduce in its rhythm the order of the 
universe, which †he ancients called “kosmos,” †ha† is to say ornate, since i† is like a greo† 
animal on whom there shine the perfection and the proportion of all its members. And praised be our 
Creator, who has decreed all things, in their number, weight, and measure.

TERCE

In which William has an instructive conversation with the abbot.
The cellarer was a stout man, vulgar in appearance but jolly, white-haired but still strong, small 
but quick. He led us to our cells in the pilgrims' hospice. Or, rather, he led us to the cell 
assigned to my master, promising me that by the next day he would have cleared one for me also, 
since, though a novice, I was their gues† and therefore to be treated with all honor. For †ho† 
nigh† I could sleep in a long and wide niche in the wall of the cell, in which he had had some nice 
fresh straw prepared.

Then the monks brought us wine, cheese, olives, bread, and excellent raisins, and left us to our 
refreshment. We ate and drank heortily. My master did not share the austere habits of the 
Benedictines and did not like to eat in silence. For that matter, he spoke alwqys of things so good 
and wise that it wos as if o monk were reading to us the lives of the saints.
That day I could not refrain from questioning him further about the matter of the horse.
“All the same,” I said, "when you read the prints in the snow and the evidence of the branches, you 
did not yet know Brunellus. In a certain sense those prints spoke of all horses, or at least all 
horses of


thot breed. Mustn't we say, then, that the book of nature speaks to us only of essences, cts many 
distinguished theologians teach*“

“Not entirely, dear Adso,” my master replied. “True, that kind of print expressed to me, if you 
like, the idea of 'horse,‘ the verbum mentis, and would have expressed the sctme to me wherever I 
might hove found it. But the print in that place and at that hour of the day told me that at least 
one of all possible horses had passed that way. So I found myself halfway between the perception of 
the concept ’horse’ and the knowledge of an individual horse. And in any case, what I knew of the 
universal horse had been given me by those traces, which were singular. I could say I was caught at 
that moment between the singularity of the traces and my ignorance, which assumed the quite 
diaphanous form of a universal idea. If you see something from a distance, and you do not 
understand what it is, you will be content with defining it as a body of some dimension. When you 
come closer, you will then define it as an animal, even if you do not yet know whether it is a 
horse or an ass. And finally, when it is still closer, you will be able to say it is a horse even 
if you do not yet know whether it is Brunellus or Niger. And only when you are at the proper 
distance will you see that it is Brunellus (or, rather, that horse and not another, however you 
decide to coll it). And that will be full knowledge, the learning of the singular. So an hour ago I 
could expect all horses, but not because of the vctstness of my intellect, but because of the 
paucity of my deduction. And my intellect's hunger was sated only when I sow the single horse that 
the monks were leading by the halter. Only then did I truly know that my previous reasoning, had 
brought me close to the truth. And so the ideas, which I was using earlier to imagine a horse I had 
not yet seen, were pure signs, as the hoofprints in the snow were signs of the idea of ’horse’; and 
sins and the signs of signs are used only when we are lacing things.”

On other occasions I had heard him speak with great skepticism about universal ideas and with great 
respect about individual things; and afterward, too, I thought this tendency came to him from his 
being both a Briton and q Franciscan. But that dqy he did not have the strength to face theological 
disputes, so I curled up in the space allotted me, wrapped myself in a blanket, and fell sound 
asleep.

Anyone coming in could have mistaken me for a bundle. And this is surely what the abbot did when he 
pctid William q visit towctrd the third hour. So it was thqt I could listen, unnoticed, to their 
first conversation.

And so Abo arrived. He apologized for †he intrusion, repeated his welcome, and said †ha† he had †o 
speak with William privately, about a very serious matter.

He began by congratulating his guest on the skill demonstrated in the business of the horse, and 
asked how he had been able to give such confident information about an animal he had never seen. 
William explained to him briefly and with detachment the path he had followed, and the abbot 
complimented him highly on his acumen. He sqid he would have expected nothing less from a man 
preceded by a reputation for great wisdom. He soid he had received a letter from the abbot of Forfa 
that not only spoke of William's mission for the Emperor (which they would discuss in the coming 
days) but also added that in England and in Italy my master had acted as inquisitor in some trials, 
where he had distinguished himself by his perspicoci†y, along wi†h a grea† humility.

“I was very pleased to learn,” the abbot continued, “that in numerous cases you decided the accused 
was innocent. I believe, and never more than during these sad days, in the constant presence of the


Evil One in humqn affairs"—and he looked around, imperceptibly, as if the enemy were Iurkin9 within 
those walls—“but I believe also that often the Evil One works through second causes. And I know 
that he can impel his victims to do evil in such a way that the blame falls on a righteous man, and 
the Evil One rejoices then as the righteous man is burned in the place of his succubus. Inquisitors 
often, to demonstrate their zectl, wrest a confession from the accused at all costs, thinking that 
the only good inquisitor is one who concludes the trial by finding a scapegoat.  “

“An inquisitor, too, can be impelled by the Devil,” William said.

“Tha† is possible,” †he abbo† admi††ed wi†h grea† circumspec†ion, “because †he designs of †he 
Almighty are inscrutable, and far be it from me to cast ony shodow of suspicion on such worthy men. 
Indeed, it is as one of them that I need you today. In this abbey something has hoppened thot 
requires the attention and counsel of an acute and prudent man such as you are. Acute in 
uncovering, and prudent (if necessary) in covering. If a shepherd errs, he must be isolated from 
other shepherds, but woe unto us if the sheep begin to distrust shepherds.”

“I see your point,” William said. I hqd already had occasion to observe that when he expressed 
himself so promptly ond politely he was usually concealing, in an honest woy, his dissent or 
puzzlement.

“For this reason,” the abbot continued, “I consider that any case involving the error of a shepherd 
can be en†rus†ed only †o men like you, who can distinguish no† only good from evil, bu† also wha† 
is expedien† from who† is no†. I like †o †hink you pronounced o sentence of guil†y only when ”

“. the accused were guilty of criminal acts, of poisoning, of the corruption of innocent youths, or
other abominations my mouth dares not utter ”

“... that you pronounced sentence only when,” the abbot continued, not heeding the interruption, 
“the presence of the Devil was so evident to all eyes that it was impossible to act otherwise 
without the clemency's being more scandalous than the crime itself.”

“When I found someone guilty,” William explained, “he hod really committed crimes of such gravity 
that in all conscience I could hand him over to the secular arm.”

The abbot was bewildered for a moment. “Why,” he asked, “do you insist on speaking of criminal octs 
without referring to their diabolical cause*”

"Because reasoning about causes and effects is a very difficult thing, and I believe the only judge 
of
†ho† can be God. We are already hard pu† to establish a relationship between such an obvious effec† 
as a charred tree and the Ii9htningbolt that set fire to it, so to trace sometimes endless chains 
of causes and effects seems †o me as foolish as †rying †o build a †ower †ha† will †ouch †he sky.

"Le† us suppose a man has been killed by poisoning. This is a given lac†. I† is possible for me †o 
imagine, in the foce of certain undeniable signs, thot the poisoner is a second man. On such simple 
chains of causes my mind con act with o certoin confidence in its power. But how can I complicate 
the chain, imagining that, to cause the evil deed, there was yet another intervention, not human 
this time, but diabolical* I do not say it is impossible: the Devil, like your horse Brunellus, 
also indicates his


passage through clear signs. But why must I hunt for these proofs* Is it not already enough for me 
to know that the guilty party is that man and for me to turn him over to the secular arm* In any 
case his punishment will be death, God forgive him.“

“But I have heqrd that in q trial held qt Kilkenny three yeqrs qgo, in which certain persons were 
accused of hoving commi††ed Ioo†hsome crimes, you did no† deny diabolical in†erven†ion, once †he 
guilty parties had been identified.”

“Nor did I affirm it openly, in so mony words. I did not deny it, true. Who am I to express 
judgments on the plots of the Evil One, especially,” he added, and seemed to want to insist on this 
reason, “in cases where those who had initiated the inquisition, the bishop, the city magistrates, 
and the whole populace, perhaps the. accused themselves, truly wanted to feel the presence of the 
Devil* There, perhaps the only real proof of the presence of the Devil was the intensity with which 
everyone at that moment desired to know he was at work. ”

“Are you telling me, then,” the abbot soid in a worried tone, “that in many trials the Devil does 
not act only within the guilty one but perhaps and above all in the judges*”

“Could I make such a statement*” William asked, and I noticed that the question was formulated in 
such a way that the abbot was unable to affirm that he could; so William took advantage of his 
silence to change the direction of their dialogue. “But these, after all, are remote things. I hqve 
abandoned
†ho† noble ac†ivi†y and if I did so, i† wos because †he Lord wished i† ”

“No doub†,” †he abbo† admi††ed.

“... and now,” William continued, “I concern myself with other delicate questions. And I would like 
to
deal wi†h †he one †ha† distresses you, if you will speak †o me abou† i†.”

I felt the abbot was pleased to be able to conclude that discussion and return to his problem. He 
then begctn telling, with very careful choice of words and with long pctraphrases, ctbout ctn 
unusuctl event that had taken place a few days before and had left in its wake great distress among 
the monks. He was speaking of the matter with William, he said, because, since William had great 
knowledge both of the human spirit and of the wiles of the Evil One, Abo hoped his guest would be 
able to devote a part of his valuable time to shedding light on a painful enigma. What had 
happened, then, was this: Adelmo of Otranto, a monk still young thou9h already famous as a master 
illuminotor, who had been decorating the manuscripts of the library with the most beautiful images, 
had been found one morning by a goatherd at the bottom of the cliff below the Aedificium. Since he 
had been seen by other monks in choir during compline but had not reappeared at matins, he had 
probably fallen there during the darkest hours of the night. The night of ct great snowstorm, in 
which flctkes as sharp as blades fell, almost like hail, driven by a furious south wind. Soaked by 
thot snow, which had first melted and then frozen into shards of ice, the body had been discovered 
at the foot of the sheer drop, torn by the rocks it had struck on the way down. Poor, fragile, 
mortal thing, God have mercy on him. Thanks to the battering the body had suffered in its broken 
fall, determining from which precise spot it had fallen was no† easy: certainly from one of †he 
windows †ha† opened in rows on †he †hree stories on †he †hree sides of the tower exposed to the 
abyss.



“Where have you buried †he poor body*” William asked.

“In the cemetery, naturally,” the abbot replied. “Perhaps you noticed it: it lies between the north 
side of the church, the Aedificium, and the vegetable garden.”

“I see,” William said, “and I see that your problem is the following. If that unhappy youth, God 
forbid, committed suicide, the next day you would have found one of those windows open, whereas you 
found them all closed, and with no sign of water at the foot of any of them.”
The abbot, as I have said, was a man of great and diplomatic composure, but this time he made a 
movemen† of surprise †ha† robbed him †o†aIly of †ha† decorum sui†ed †o o grave and magnanimous 
person, as Aristotle has it. “Who told you*”

“You told me,” William said. “If the window had been open, you would immediately have thou9hthe had 
thrown himself out of it. From what I could tell from the outside, they are large windows of opaque 
gloss, and windows of thot sort are not usually placed, in buildings of this size, at a man's 
height. So even if a window had been open, i† would have been impossible for †he unfor†una†e mctn 
†o lean ou† and lose his balance; †hus suicide would have been †he only conceivable explanation. In 
which case you would no† have allowed him †o be buried in consecrated ground. Bu† since you gave 
him Christian burial, the windows must have been closed. And if they were closed—for I have never 
encountered, not even in witchcraft trials, a dead man whom God or the Devil allowed to climb up 
from the abyss to erase the evidence of his misdeed—†hen obviously †he presumed suicide was, on †he 
contrary, pushed, ei†her by human hand or by diabolical force. And you are wondering who was 
capable, I will not say of pushing him into the abyss, but of hoisting him to the sill; and you are 
distressed because an evil force, whether natural or supernatural, is a† work in the abbey.”
“Tha† is i† ...” †he abbo† said, ond i† was no† clear whether he was confirming William's words or 
accepting the reasons William had so admirably and reasonably expounded. “But how can you know 
there was no water at the foot of any window*”

“Because you †oId me a sou†h wind was blowing, and †he wo†er could no† be driven agains† windows 
†ho† open to the east.”

“They had not told me enough about your talents,” the abbot soid. “And you are right, there was no 
water, and now I know why. It was all as you say. And now you understand my anxiety. It would 
alrectdy be serious enough if one of my monks had stained his soul with the hateful sin of suicide. 
But I have reason to think that another of them has stained himself with an equally terrible sin. 
And if that were all ...”

“In †he firs† place, why one of †he monks* In †he abbey †here are mony o†her persons, grooms, 
goatherds, servants. ”

“To be sure, †he abbey is small bu† rich, †he abbo† agreed smugly. "One hundred fif†y servants for 
sixty monks. But everything happened in the Aedificium. There, as perhaps you already know, 
although, on the ground floor are the kitchen and the refectory, on the two upper floors are the 
scriptorium and the library. After the evening meal the Aedificium is locked, and a very strict 
rule forbids anyone


to enter." He guessed William's next question and added at once, though clearly with reluctance, 
"Including, naturally, the monks, but ...”

"Bu†*”

"But I reject absolutely—absolutely, you understand—the possibility thot a servant would have had 
the courage to enter there at night.“ There was a kind of defiant smile in his eyes, albeit brief 
as a flash, or a falling star. “Let us say they would have been afraid, you know ... sometimes 
orders given to the simpleminded have to be reinforced with a threat, a suggestion that something 
terrible will happen to the disobedient, perforce something supernatural. A monk, on the contrary 
...”
“I understand.”

“Furthermore, a monk could have other reasons for venturin9into a forbidden place. I mean reasons 
thot are ... reasonable, even if contrary to the rule. ”

William noticed the abbot's uneasiness and asked q question perhaps intended to chqnge the subject, 
though it produced an even greater uneasiness.
"Speaking of a possible murder, you said, 'And if that were all.’ What did you mean*”
"Did I say that* Well, no one commits murder without a reason, however perverse. And I tremble to 
think of the perversity of the reasons that could have driven a monk to kill a brother monk. There. 
Tha† is i†.”
"Nothing else*”
“Nothing else that I can say to you.“
“You mectn that there is nothing else you have the power to sqy*“
“Please, Brother William, Brother William,“ and the abbot underlined "Brother” both times. William 
blushed violently and remarked, “Eris sacerdos in aeternum.”
"Thank you," the abbot said.
O Lord God, what a terrible mystery my imprudent superiors were broaching at that moment, the one 
driven by anxiety and the other by curiosity. Because, a novice approaching the mysteries of the 
holy priesthood of God, humble you†h †ha† I was, I, †oo, understood †ha† †he abbo† knew something 
bu† had learned it under the seal of confession. He must have heard from someone‘s lips a sinful 
detail that could have a bearing on the tragic end of Adelmo. Perhaps for this reason he was 
begging Brother William to uncover a secret he himself suspected, though he was unable to reveal to 
anyone—and he hoped that my master, with the powers of his intellect, would cast light on—what he, 
the abbot, had to shroud in shadows because of the sublime law of charity.


"Very well,” William said then, "may I question the monks*”
"You may."
“Mqy I move freely abou† †he abbey*”

“I grant you that power.“
“Will you assign me this mission coram monachis*” "This very evening.”
“I shall begin, however, today, before the monks know what you have charged me to do. Besides, I 
already had a great desire—not the least reason for my sojourn here—to visit your library, which is 
spoken of wi†h admiration in all †he abbeys of Christendom.”
The abbo† rose, almos† s†ctr†ing, wi†h a very †ense fctce. “You can move freely through †he whole 
abbey, as I have soid. Bu† no†, †o be sure, on †he †op floor of †he Aedificium, †he library.”

"Why no†*”

"I would hove explained †o you before, bu† I †hough† you knew. You see, our library is no† like 
o†hers.

“I know it has more books than any other Christian library. I know that in comparison with your 
cases,
†hose of Bobbio or Pomposa, of Cluny or Fleury, seem †he room of a boy barely being introduced †o 
†he abacus. I know †ha† †he six thousand codices †ha† were †he boos† of Novalesa a hundred or more 
years ago are few compared to yours, and perhaps many of those are now here. I know your abbey is 
the only light that Christianity can oppose to the thirty-six libraries of Baghdad, to the ten 
thousand codices of the Vizir Ibn aI-Alkqmi, thqt the number of your Bibles equqls the two thousand 
four hundred Korans that are the pride of Cairo, and thot the reality of your cases is luminous 
evidence against the proud legend of the infidels who years ago claimed (intimates as they are of 
the Prince of Falsehood) †he library of Tripoli was rich in six million volumes and inhabi†ed by 
eigh†y thousand commentators and two hundred scribes.“
“You are right, heaven be praised.“
“I know †ha† many of the monks living in your mids† come from other abbeys scattered all over the 
world. Some stay here a short time, to copy manuscripts to be found nowhere else and to carry them 
back †hen †o †heir own house, no† wi†hou† having brough† you in exchange some o†her unavailable 
manuscript that you will copy and add to your treasure; and others stay for a very long time, 
occasionally remaining here till death, because only here can they find the works that enlighten 
their research. And so you have among you Germans, Dacians, Spaniards, Frenchmen, Greeks. I know 
that the Emperor Frederick, many and many years ago, asked you to compile for him a book of the 
prophecies of Merlin and then to translate it into Arabic, to be sent as a gift to the Sultan of 
Egypt. I know, finally, that such a glorious abbey as Murbach in these very sad times no longer has 
a single


scribe, that at 5t. Gall only a few monks are left who know how to write, that now in the cities 
corporations and guilds arise, made up of laymen who work for †he universities, and only your abbey 
day after day renews, or—what am I saying*—it exalts to ever greater heights the glories of your 
order. ”

“Monasterium sine libris,” the abbot recited, pensively, “est sicut civitas sine opibus, costrum 
sine numeris, coquina sine suppellectili, mensa sine cibis, hortus sine herbis, pratum sine 
floribus, arbor sine fouis.  And our order, growing up under the double command of work and prayer, 
was light to the
whole known world, depository of knowledge, salvation of an ancien† learning †ho† threatened to 
disappear in fires, sacks, earthquakes, forge of new writing and increase of the ancient.  Oh, as 
you
well know, we live now in very dark times, and I blush to tell you that not many years ago the 
Council of Vienne had to reaffirm that every monk is under obligation to take orders.  How many of 
our abbeys,
which two hundred years ago were resplendent with grandeur and sanctity, are now the refuge of the 
slothful* The order is still powerful, but the stink of the cities is encroaching upon our holy 
places, the people of God are now inclined to commerce and wars of faction; down below in the great 
settlements, where the spirit of sanctity can find no lodging, not only do they speak (of laymen, 
nothing else could be expec†ed) in †he vulgctr †ongue, bu† †hey are already writing in i†, †hough 
none of these volumes will ever come within our walls—fomented of heresies as those volumes 
inevitably become! Because of mankind‘s sins the world is teetering on the brink of the abyss, 
permeated by the very abyss †ha† †he abyss invokes. And tomorrow, as Honorius would have i†, men's 
bodies will be smaller than ours, just as ours are smaller than those of the ancients. Mundus 
senescit. If God has now given our order a mission, i† is †o oppose †his race †o †he abyss, by 
preserving, repeating, and defending the treasure of wisdom our fathers entrusted to us. Divine 
Providence has ordered that the universal government, which at the beginning of the world was in 
the East, should gradually, as the time was nearing fulfillment, move westward to worn us that the 
end of the world is approaching, because the course of events has ctlready reached the confines of 
the universe. But until the millennium occurs definitively, until the triumph, however brief, of 
the foul beast that is the Antichrist, it is up to us to defend the treasure of the Christian 
world, and the very word of God, as he dictated it to the prophets and to the apostles, as the 
fathers repeated it without changing a syllctble, as the schools have tried to gloss it, even if 
todcty in the schools themselves the serpent of pride, envy, folly is nesting. In this sunset we 
are still torches and light, high on the horizon. And as long as these walls stand, we shall be the 
custodians of the divine Word.”

“Amen,” William said in a devout tone. “But what does this have to do with the fact that the 
librory may no† be visited*”

“You see, Brother William,” the abbot said, "to achieve the immense and holy task that enriches 
those walls”—and he nodded toword the bulk of the Aedificium; which could be glimpsed from the 
cell's windows, lowering above †he abba†iaI church i†seIf—“devou† men have †oiIed for centuries, 
observing iron rules. The library was laid out on a plan which has remained obscure to all over the 
centuries, and which none of the monks is called upon to know. Only the librarian has received the 
secret, from the librarian who preceded him, and he communicates it, while still alive, to the 
assistant librarian, so that death will not take him by surprise and rob the community of that 
knowledge. And the secret seols the lips of both men. Only the librarian has, in addition to that 
knowledge, the right to move through the labyrinth of the books, he alone knows where to find them 
and where to replace them, he alone is responsible for their safekeeping. The other monks work in 
the scriptorium and may know the list of


the volumes that the library houses. But a list of titles often tells very little; only the 
librarian knows, from the collocation of the volume, from its degree of inaccessibility, what 
secrets, what truths or falsehoods, the volume contains. Only he decides how, when, and whether to 
give it to the monk who requests it; sometimes he first consults me. Because not all truths are for 
all ears, not all falsehoods can be recognized as such by a pious soul; and the monks, finolly, are 
in the scriptorium to carry out q precise task, which requires them to read certain volumes and not 
others, and not to pursue every foolish curiosity that seizes them, whether through weakness of 
intellect or through pride or through diabolical prompting.”
“So in the library there are also books containing falsehoods. ”
“Monsters exist because they are part of the divine plan, and in the horrible features of those 
some monsters the power of the Creator is revealed. And by divine plan, too, there exist also books 
by wizards, the cabalas of the Jews, the fables of pagan poets, the lies of the infidels. It was 
the firm and holy conviction of †hose who founded †he abbey and sustained i† over †he centuries 
†ha† even in books of falsehood, to the eyes of the sage reader, a pale reflection of the divine 
wisdom can shine. And therefore the library is a vessel of these, too. But for this very reason, 
you understand, it cannot be visited by jus† anyone. And furthermore,” †he abbo† added, as if †o 
apologize for †he weakness of this last argument, “a book is a fragile creature, it suffers the 
wear of time, it fears rodents, the elements, clumsy hands. If for a hundred and a hundred years 
everyone had been able freely to handle our codices, †he mqjori†y of †hem would no longer exis†. So 
†he librarian pro†ec†s †hem no† only against mankind but also against nature, and devotes his life 
to this war with the forces of oblivion, the enemy of truth.”
“And so no one, except for two people, enters the top floor of the Aedificium. ”

The abbot smiled. “No one should. No one can. No one, even if he wished, would succeed. The library 
defends itself, immeasurable as the truth it houses, deceitful as the falsehood it preserves. A 
spiritual labyrinth, i† is also a terrestrial labyrinth. You migh† enter and you migh† no† emerge. 
And hoving sqid †his, I would like you †o conform †o †he rules of †he abbey.”

“But you have not dismissed the possibility that Adelmo fell from one of the windows of the 
library. And how can I study his death if I do not see the place where the story of his death may 
have begun*”

“Brother William,” †he abbo† said, in a conciliatory †one; “a man who described my horse Brunellus 
without seeing him, and the death of Adelmo though knowing virtually nothing of it, will have no 
difficulty studying places to which he does not have access.”

William bowed. “You are wise also when you ore severe. I† shall be as you wish.”

“If ever I were wise, it would be because I know how to be severe,” the abbot answered.

“One las† †hing,” William asked. “Uber†ino*”

“He is here. He is expecting you. You will find him in church.”




"When*"

"Always,” the abbot said, and smiled. "You must know that, although very learned, he is not a man 
to appreciate the library. He considers it q secular lure.  For the most pqrt he stays in church,
meditating, praying. ”
"Is he old*” William asked, hesitating. “How long has it been since you saw him*” "Many years.”
“He is weary. Very detached from the things of this world. He is sixty-eight. But I believe he 
still possesses the spirit of his youth.“
“I will seek him out at once. Thqnk you.”

The abbot asked him whether he wanted to join the community for the midday defection, after sext. 
William said he had only just eaten—very well, too—and he would prefer to see Ubertino at once. The 
abbo† †ook his leave.

He was going out of the cell when from the courtyard a heartrending cry arose, like that of someone 
mortally wounded, followed by other, equally horrible cries. "What is that*” William asked, 
disconcerted. "Nothing," the abbot answered, smiling. “At this time of year they sloughter the 
pigs. A job for †he swineherds. This is no† †he blood †hq† should concern you.“
He went out, and he did a disservice to his reputation as a clever man. Because the next morning  
But
curb your impatience, garrulous tongue of mine. For on the day of which I am telling, and before 
its night, many more things happened that it would be best to narrate.

SEXT

In which Adso admires the door of the church, and William meets Ubertino of Casale again.

The church was not majestic like others I saw later at Strasbourg, Chartres, Bamberg, and Paris. It 
resembled, rather, those I had already seen in Italy, with scant inclination to soar dizzyingly 
toward the heavens, indeed firmly set on the eqrth, often broader than they were high: but at the 
first level this one was surmounted, like a fortress, by a sequence of square battlements, and 
above this story another construction rose, not so much a tower as a solid, second church, capped 
by a pitched roof and pierced by severe windows. A robus† abba†iaI church such as our forefathers 
buil† in Provence and Longuedoc, for from †he audacity and †he excessive tracery charac†eris†ic of 
†he modern s†yIe, which only in more recen† †imes has been enriched, I believe, above †he choir, 
wi†h a pinnacle boldly pointed toward the roof of the heavens.


Two straight and unadorned columns stood on either side of the entrance, which opened, at first 
sigh†, like a single grea† arch; bu† from †he columns began †wo embrosures †ha†, surmounted by 
o†her,
multiple arches, led the gaze, as if into the heart of an abyss, toward the doorway itself, crowned 
by a great tympanum, supported on the sides by two imports and in the center by a carved pillar, 
which divided the entrance into two apertures protected by oak doors reinforced in metal. At that 
hour of the day the weak sun was beating almost straight down on the roof and the light fell 
obliquely on the facade without illuminating the tympanum; so after passing the two columns, we 
found ourselves abruptly under the almost sylvan vault of the arches that sprang from the series of 
lesser columns thot proportionally reinforced the embrasures. When our eyes had finally grown 
accustomed to the
9! m, the silent speech of the carved stone, accessible as it immediately was to the gaze and the 
imagination of anyone (for images are the literature of the layman), dazzled my eyes and plunged me 
into a vision that even today my tongue can hardly describe.

I saw a throne set in the sky and a figure seated on the throne. The face of the Seated One was 
stern and impassive, the eyes wide and flaring over a terrestrial humankind that had reached the 
end of its story; majestic hair and beard flowed around the face and over the chest like the waters 
of a river, in streams all equal, symmetricqlly divided in two. The crown on his heqd was rich in 
enamels and jewels, the purple imperial tunic was arranged in broad folds over the knees, woven 
with embroideries and laces of gold and silver thread. The left hand, resting on one knee, held a 
sealed book, the right was uplifted in an attitude of blessing or—I could not tell—of admonition. 
The face was illuminated by the tremendous beauty of a halo, containing a cross and bedecked with 
flowers, while around the throne and above the face of the Seated One I saw an emerald rainbow 
glittering Before the throne, beneath the feet of the Seated One, a sea of crystal flowed, and 
around the Seated One, beside and above the throne, I saw four awful creatures—awful for me, as I 
looked at them, transported, but docile and dear for the Seated One, whose praises they sang 
without cease.

Or, rather, not all could be called awful, because one seemed to me handsome and kindly, the man to 
my left (and to the right of the Seated One), who held out a book. But on the other side there was 
an eagle I found horrifying, its beck ogape, its thick feathers arranged like a cuirass, powerful 
talons, great wings outstretched. And at the feet of the Seethed One, under the first two figures, 
there were
†he o†her †wo, a bull and a lion, each monster clutching a book between †aIons or hoofs, †he body 
turned away from the throne, but the head toward the throne, as if shoulders and neck twisted in a 
fierce impulse, flanks tensed, the limbs those of a dying animal, maw open, serpentlike tails 
coiled and writhing, culminating, at the top, in tongues of flame. Both monsters were winged, both 
crowned by haloes; despite their formidable appearance, they were creatures not of hell, but of 
heaven, and if they seemed fearsome it was because they were roaring in adoration of One Who Is to 
Come and who would judge the quick and the dead.

Around the throne, beside the four creatures and under the feet of the Seqted One, as if seen 
through the †ransporen† waters of the crystal sea, as if to fill the whole space of the vision, 
arranged according to the triangular frame of the tympanum, rising from a base of seven plus seven, 
then to three plus three and then to two plus two, at either side of the great throne, on 
twenty-four little thrones, there were twenty-four ancients, wearing white garments and crowned to 
gold. Some held lutes in their hands, one a vase of perfumes, and only one was playing an 
instrument, all the others were in ecstasy, faces turned to the Seated One, whose praises they were 
singing, their limbs also
†wis†ed like †he creatures', so †ha† all could see †he Sea†ed One, no† in wild fashion, however, 
bu† wi†h


movements of ecstatic dance—as David must have danced before the Ark—so that wherever their pupils 
were, against the law governing the stature of bodies, they converged on the same radiant spot. Oh, 
what a harmony of abandonment and impulse, of unnatural and yet graceful postures, in that mystical 
language of limbs miraculously freed from the weight of corporeal matter, marked quantity infused 
with new substantial form, as if the holy band were struck by qn impetuous wind, breath of life, 
frenzy of delight, rejoicing song of praise miraculously transformed, from the sound thot it was, 
into image.

Bodies inhabited in every par† by †he Spiri†, illuminated by revelation, faces overcome wi†h 
amazement, eyes shining with enthusiasm, cheeks flushed with love, pupils dilated with joy: this 
one thunderstruck by a pleasurable consternation, that one pierced by a consternated pleasure, some 
transfigured by wonder, some rejuvenated by bliss, there they all were, singing with the expression 
of their faces, the drapery of their tunics, the position and tension of their limbs, singing a new 
song, lips parted in a smile of perennial praise. And beneath the feet of the ancients, and arched 
over them and over the throne and over the tetromorphic group, arranged in symmetrical bands, 
barely distinguishable one from another because the or†is†‘s skill had mode them all so mutually 
proportionate, united in their variety and vctried to their unity, unique in their diversity ctnd 
diverse in their opt assembly, in wondrous congruency of the parts with the delightful sweetness of 
hues, miracle of consonance and concord of voices among themselves dissimilar, a company arrayed 
like the strings of the zither, consentient and conspiring continued cognition through deep and 
interior force suited to perform univocqlly in the same alternating play of the equivocal, 
decoration and collage of creatures beyond reduction †o vicissitudes and †o vicissitudes reduced, 
work of amorous connecting sustained by a law at once heavenly and worldly (bond and stable nexus 
of peace, love, virtue, regimen, power, order, origin, life, light, splendor, species, and figure), 
numerous and resplendent equality through the shining of the form over the proportionate parts of 
the material—there, all the flowers and leaves and vines and bushes and corymbs were entwined, of 
qll the grasses thqt adorn the gardens of earth and heaven, violet, cystus, thyme, lily, privet, 
narcissus, taro, acanthus, mollow, myrrh, and Mecca balsam.
But as my soul was carried away by thqt concert of terrestrial beauty and mctjestic supernatural 
signals, and was abou† to burs† forth in a psalm of joy, my eye, accompanying the proportioned 
rhythm of the rose windows that bloomed at the ancients' feet, lighted on the interwoven figures of 
the central pillar, which supported the tympanum. What were they and what symbolic message did they 
communicate, those three crisscrossed pairs of lions rampant, like arches, each with hind paws 
planted on the 9round,forepctws on the bctck of his companion, mane in serpentine curls, mouth taut 
in a threatening snarl, bound to the very body of the pillar by a paste, or a nest, of tendrils* To 
calm my spirit, as they had perhaps been meant also to tame the diabolical nature of the lion and 
to transform it into a symbolic allusion to higher things, on the sides of the pillar there were 
two human figures, unnaturally tall as the column itself and twins to two others facing them on 
either side from the
decorated imports, where each of the oak doors had its jamb. These figures, then, were four old 
men, from whose paraphernalia I recognized Peter and Paul, Jeremiah and Isaiah, also twisted as if 
in a dance step, their long bony hands raised, the fingers splayed like wings, and like wings were 
their beards and hair stirred by a prophetic wind, the folds of the very long garments stirred by 
the long legs giving life to waves and scrolls, opposed to the lions bu† of the same stuff as the 
lions. And as I withdrew my fascinated eye from that enigmatic polyphony of sainted limbs and 
infernal sinews, I saw beside the door, under the deep arches, sometimes depicted on the embrasures 
in the space between


the slender columns that supported and adorned them, and again on the thick foliage of the capital 
of each column, and from there ramifying toward the sylvan vault of the multiple arches, other 
visions horrible to contemplate, and justified in that place only by their parabolic and 
allegorical power or by the moral lesson that they conveyed. I saw a voluptuous woman, naked and 
fleshless, gnawed by foul toqds, sucked by serpents, coupled with a fat-bellied satyr whose gryphon 
legs were covered with wiry hairs, howling its own damnation from an obscene throat; and I saw a 
miser, stiff in the stiffness of death on his sumptuously columned bed, now helpless prey of a 
cohort of demons, one of whom tore from the dying man's mouth his soul in the form of an infant 
(alas, never to be again born to eternal life); and I sow a proud man with a devil clinging to his 
shoulders and thrusting his claws into the man's eyes, while two gluttons tore each other apart in 
a repulsive hand-to-hand struggle, and other creatures as well, goat head and lion fur, panther‘s 
jaws, all prisoners to a forest of flames whose searing breath I could almost feel. And around 
them, mingled with them, above their heads and below their feet, more faces and more limbs: a man 
and a woman clutching each other by the hair, two esps sucking the eyes of one of the damned, a 
grinning man whose hooked hands parted the maw of a hydra, and all the animals of Satan's bestiary, 
assembled in a consistory and set as guard and crown of the throne that faced them, singing its 
glory in their defeat, fauns, beings of double sex, brutes with six- fingered hands, sirens, 
hippocentaurs, gorgons, harpies, incubi, drctgopods, minotcturs, lynxes, pards, chimeras, 
cynopholes who darted fire from their nostrils, crocodiles, polycaudate, hairy serpents, 
salamanders, horned vipers, tortoises, snakes, two-headed creatures whose backs were armed with 
teeth, hyenas, otters, crows, hydrophora with saw-tooth horns, frogs, gryphons, monkeys, dog-heads, 
leucrota, manticores, vultures, paranders, weasels, dragons, hoopoes, owls, basilisks, hypnales, 
presters, spectafici, scorpions, saurians, whales, scitales, amphisbenoe, iaculi, dipsoses, green 
lizards, pilot fish, octopi, morays, and sea turtles. The whole population of the nether world 
seemed to have gathered to act as vestibule, dark forest, desperate wasteland of exclusion, at the 
apparition of the Seated One in the tympanum, at his face promising and threatening, they, the 
defeated of Armageddon, facing Him who will come ctt lctst to separate the quick from the dead. And 
stunned (almost) by that sight, uncertain at this point whether I was in a friendly place or in the 
volley of the last judgment, I was terrified and could hardly restrain my tears, and I seemed to 
hear (or did I really hear*) that voice and I sow those visions that had accompanied my youth as a 
novice, my first reading of the sqcred books, and my nights of meditation in the choir of Melk, and 
in the delirium of my weak and weakened senses I heard a voice mighty as a trumpet thot said, 
“Write in a book what you now see“ (and this is what I am doing), and I saw seven golden 
candlesticks and in the midst of the candlesticks One like unto the son of man, his breast girt 
with a golden girdle, his head and hair white as purest wool, his eyes as a flame of fire, his feet 
like unto fine brass, as if they burned in a furnace, his voice as the sound of many waters, and he 
had in his right hand seven stars and out of his mouth went a two-edged sword. And I saw a door 
open in heaven and He who was seated appeared to me like a jasper and a sardonyx, and †here was a 
rainbow round abou† †he †hrone and ou† of †he †hrone proceeded thunder and lightning. And the 
Seated One took in His hands a sharp sickle and cried: “Thrust in thy sickle and reap, for the time 
is come for thee to reap; for the harvest of the ectrth is ripe”; and He that sat on the cloud 
thrust His sickle on the earth; and the earth was reaped.

I† was a† †his poin† †ha† I realized †he vision was speaking precisely of wha† was happening in †he 
abbey, of wha† we had learned from †he abbo†’s re†icen† lips—and how mony †imes in †he following 
days did I return to contemplate the doorway, convinced I was experiencing the very events that it 
narrated. And I knew we had made our way up there in order to witness a great and celestial 
massacre.



I trembled, as if I were drenched by the icy winter rain. And I heard yet another voice, but this 
time it came from behind me and was a different voice, because it came from the earth and not from 
the blinding core of my vision; and indeed it shattered the vision, because William (I became aware 
again of his presence), also lost until then in contemplation, turned as I did.

The creature behind us was apparently a monk, though his torn and dirty habit made him look like a 
vagabond, and his face bore a resemblance †o †hose of †he monsters I had jus† seen on †he capitals. 
Unlike many of my brothers, I have never in my whole life been visited by the Devil: but I believe 
that if he were to appear to me one day, prevented by divine decree from concealing completely his 
nature even though he chose to resemble a man, he would have the very features our interlocutor 
presented to me at this moment. His head was hairless, not shaved in penance but as the result of 
the past action of some viscid eczema: the brow was so low thot if he had had hair on his head it 
would have mingled
with his eyebrows (which were thick and sha9 y); the eyes were round, with tiny mobile pupils, and 
whether the gaze was innocent or malign I could not tell: perhaps it was both, in different moods, 
in flashes. The nose could not be called a nose, for it was only a bone that began between the 
eyes, but as it rose from the face it immediately sank again, transforming itself only into two 
dark holes, broad nostrils thick with hair. The mouth, joined to the nose by a scar, was wide and 
ill-made, stretching more to the right than to the left, and between the upper lip, nonexistent, 
and the lower, prominent and fleshy, there protruded, in an irregular pattern, black teeth sharp as 
a dog's.
The man smiled (or at least so I believed) and, holding up one finger as if in admonition, he said:
"Penitenziagite! Watch out for the draco who cometh in futurum to gnaw your anima! Death is super 
nos! Pray †he San†o Pa†er come †o liberal nos a malo ond all our sin! Ha ha, you like †his 
negromonzia de Domini Nostri Jesu Christi! Et anco jois m'es dols e plazer m'es dolors.  Cqve el 
diabolo! Semper lying
in woit for me in some angulum to snap at my heels. But Salvatore is not stupidus! Bonum 
monasterium, and aquf refectorium and pray to dominum nostrum. And the reslo is not worth merda. 
Amen. No*“

As this story continues, I shctll have to speqk agctin, and at length, of this creature ctnd record 
his speech. I confess I find i† very difficul† †o do so because I could no† soy now, as I could 
never understand then, what language he spoke. It was not Latin, in which the fettered men of the 
monastery expressed themselves, it was not the vulgar tongue of those parts, or any other I had 
ever heard. I believe I have given a faint idea of his manner of speech, reporting just now (as I 
remember them) the first words of his I heard. When I learned later qbout his adventurous life and 
about the various places where he had lived, putting down roots in none of them, I realized 
Salvatore spoke all languages, and no language. Or, rather, he had invented for himself a language 
which used the sinews of the languages to which he had been exposed—and once I thought that his 
was, not the Adamic
Iangua9e †ha† a hctppy mankind hctd spoken, all uni†ed by a single †ongue from †he ori9if’Iof †he 
world †o the Tower of Babel, or one of the languages that arose after the dire event of their 
division, but precisely the Babelish language of the first day after the divine chastisement, the 
language of primeval confusion. Nor, for that matter, could I call Salvatore's speech a language, 
because in every human language there are rules and every term signifies ad pIaci†um a thing, 
according to a low †ho†
does no† change, for man canno† call the dog once dog and once ca†, or utter sounds to which a 
consensus of people has not assigned a definite meaning, as would happen if someone said the word 
"blitiri“ And yet, one way or another, I did understand what Salvatore meant, and so did the 
others.


Proof thot he spoke not one, but all languages, none correctly, taking words sometimes from one and 
sometimes from another. I also noticed afterward that he might refer to something first in Latin 
and later in Provensal, and I realized that he was not so much inventing his own sentences as using 
the disiecta membra of other sentences, heard some time in the past, according to the present 
situation and the things he wanted to say, as if he could spectk of a food, for instance, only with 
the words of the people among whom he had eaten that food, and express his joy only with sentences 
that he had heard uttered by joyful people the day when he had similarly experienced joy. His 
speech was somehow like his face, put together with pieces from other people's faces, or like some 
precious reliquaries I have seen (si licet magnis componere porva, if I may link diabolical things 
with the divine), fabricated from the shards of other holy objects. At that moment, when I met him 
for the first time, Salvatore seemed to me, because of both his face and his way of speaking, a 
creature not unlike the hairy and hoofed hybrids I had just seen under the portal. Later I realized 
thot the man was probably good-hearted and humorous. Later still ... But we must not get ahead of 
our story. Particularly since, the moment he had spoken, my master questioned him with great 
curiosity.
“Why did you say Penitenziagite*” he asked.
"Domine fro†e magnificen†issimo,“ Salva†ore answered, with a kind of bow, "Jesus ven†urus es† and 
les hommes must do penitenzia. No*"

William gave him a hard look. "Did you come here from a conven† of Minori†es*”

“Non comprends."

“I am asking if you hove lived among the friars of Soint Francis; I ask if you have known the 
so-called apostles. ”

Salvatore blanched, or, rather, his tanned and savage face turned gray. He made a deep bow, 
muttered through half-closed lips a “vade retro,” devoutly blessed himself, and fled, looking back 
at us every now and then.
“What did you ask him*“ I said to William.
He was thoughtful for a moment. “It is of no matter; I will tell you later. Let us go inside now. I 
wont to find Ubertino."

It was just after the sixth hour. The pale sun entered from the west, and therefore through only a 
few, narrow windows, into the interior of the church. A fine strip of light still touched the main 
altar, whose frontal seemed to glow with a 9 Iden radiance. The side naves were immersed in gloom.
Near the last chapel before the altar, in the left nave, stood a slender column on which a stone 
Virgin was set, carved in the modern fashion, with an ineffable smile and prominent abdomen, 
wearing a pretty dress with a small bodice, the child on her arm. At the foot of the Virgin, in 
proyer, almost prostrate, there was a man in the habit of the Clunioc order.


We approached. The man, hearing the sound of our footsteps, raised his hectd. He was old, bald, 
with a globrous foce, large pale-blue eyes, a †hin red mou†h, whi†e complexion, a bony skull †o 
which †he skin clung like that of a mummy preserved in milk. The hands were white, with long 
tapering fingers. He resembled a maiden withered by premature death. He cast on us a gaze at first 
bewildered, as if we hqd disturbed him during an ecstatic vision; then his face brightened with 
joy.

"William!" he exclaimed. "My dearest brother!" He rose with some effort and came toward my master, 
embraced him, and kissed him on the mouth. "William!" he repeated, and his eyes became moist with 
tears. "How long it has been! But I recognize you still! Such a long time, so many things hove 
hoppened! So many trials sent by the Lord!" He wept. William returned his embrace, clearly moved. 
We were in the presence of Ubertino of Casale.

I hod alreody heard much talk about him, even before I came to Itoly, ond more still as I 
frequented the Franciscans of the imperial court. Someone had told me that the greatest poet of 
those days, Dante Alighieri of Florence, dead only a few years, had composed a poem (which I could 
not read, since it was written in vulgar Tuscan) of which many verses were nothing but a parophrase 
of passages wri††en by Uber†ino in his Arbor vi†qe crucifixqe. Nor wqs †his †he fqmous man's only 
claim †o meri†.
But to permit my reoder better to understond the importance of this meeting, I must try to 
reconstruct the events of those years, as I understood them both during my brief stay to central 
Italy and from listening to the many conversations William had had with abbots and monks in the 
course of our journey.

I will try to tell what I understood of these matters, even if I am not sure I can explain them 
properly. My masters at Melk had often told me that it is very difficult for a Northerner to form 
any clear idea of the religious and political vicissitudes of Italy.

The peninsula, where the power of the clergy was more evident than in any other country, and where 
more than in any other country the clergy made a display of power and wealth, for at least two 
centuries had generated movements of men bent on a poorer life, in protest against the corrupt 
priests, from whom they even refused the sacrctments. They gctthered in independent communities, 
hated equally by the feudal lords, the empire, and the city magistrates.

Finally Saint Francis had appeared, spreading a love of poverty that did not contradict the 
precepts of the church; and after his efforts the church had accepted the summons to severe 
behavior of those older movements and had purified them of the elements of disruption that lurked 
in them. There should have followed a period of meekness and holiness, but as the Franciscan order 
grew and attracted the finest men, it became too powerful, too bound to earthly matters, and many 
Franciscans wanted to restore it to its early purity. A very difficult matter for on order thot at 
the time when I was a† †he abbey already numbered more †han †hir†y thousand members sca††ered 
†hrou9hou††he
whole world. Bu† so i† was, and many of †hose monks of Sain† Francis were opposed †o †he Rule †ha†
the order had established, and they said the order had by now assumed the character of those 
ecclesiastical institutions it had come into the world to reform. And this, they said, had already 
hoppened in †he days when Sain† Francis was alive, and his words and his aims had been betrayed. 
Many of †hem rediscovered †hen a book wri††en a† †he beginning of †he †weIf†h century of our era, 
by a Cistercian monk named Joachim, to whom the spirit of prophecy was attributed. He had in fact 
foreseen the advent of a new age, in which the spirit of Christ, long corrupted through the actions 
of


his false apostles, would again be ctchieved on ectrth. And he had announced certain future events 
in a way that mode it seem clear to all that, unawares, he was speaking of the Franciscan order. 
And therefore many Franciscans had greatly rejoiced, even excessively, it seems, because then, 
around the middle of the century, the doctors of the Sorbonne condemned the teachings of that abbot 
Joachim. Apparently †hey did so becctuse †he Franciscans (and †he Dominicans) were becoming †oo 
powerful, †oo learned, at the University of Paris; and those Sorbonne doctors wanted to eliminate 
them as heretics. But this scheme was not carried out, happily for the church, which then allowed 
the dissemination of the works of Thomas Aquinas and Bonaventure of Bagnoregio, certainly not 
heretics. Whence it is clear thot in Paris, too, there was a confusion of ideas or someone who 
wished to confuse them for his own purposes. And this is the evil that heresy inflicts on the 
Christian people, obfuscating ideas and inciting all †o become inquisitors †o †heir personal 
benefi†. For wha† I saw a† †he abbey †hen (and will now recount) caused me to think that often 
inquisitors create heretics. And not only in the sense that they imagine heretics-where these do 
not exist, but also thot inquisitors repress the heretical putrefaction so vehemently that many are 
driven, to share in it, in their hatred for the jud9es. Truly, a circle conceived by the Devil. God 
preserve us.

But I wets spectking of the heresy (if such it was) of the Joachimites. And in Tuscany there was ct 
Franciscan, Gerard of Borgo San Donnino, who repeated the predictions of Joachim and made a deep 
impression on the Minorites. Thus there arose among them a band of supporters of the old Rule, 
against the reorganization of the order attempted by the great Bonaventure, who had become general 
of the order. In the final thirty years of the last century, the Council of Lyons rescued the 
Franciscan order from its enemies, who wanted to abolish i†, and allowed i† ownership of all 
property in its use (already the law for older orders). But some monks in the Marches rebelled, 
because they believed that the spirit of the Rule had been forever betrayed, since Franciscans must 
own nothing, personally or as a convent or as on order. These rebels were put in prison for life. 
It does not seem to me that they were preaching things contrctry to the Gospel, but when the 
session of earthly things is in question, it is difficult for men to reason justly. I was told that 
years later, the new general of the order, Raymond Gaufredi, found these prisoners in Ancona and, 
on freeing them, said: “Would God that all of us and the whole order were stained by such a sin.” A 
sign that what the heretics soy is not true, and there qre still men of great virtue living in the 
church.

Among these freed prisoners there was one, Angelus Clarenus, who then met a monk from Provence, 
Pierre Olieu, who preached the prophecies of Joachim, and then he met Ubertino of Casale, and in 
this way the movement of the Spirituals originated. In those years, a most holy hermit rose to the 
papal throne, Peter of Murrone, who reigned as Celestine V; and he was welcomed with relief by the 
Spirituals. “A saint will appear,” it had been said, “and he will follow the teachings of Christ, 
he will live an angelic life: tremble, ye corrupt priests.” Perhaps Celestine's life was too 
angelic, or the prelates around him were too corrupt, or he could not bear the strain of the 
interminable conflict with the Emperor and with the other kings of Europe. The fqct is that 
Celestine renounced his throne and retired to a hermitage. But in the brief period of his reign, 
less than a year, the hopes of the Spirituals were all fulfilled. They went to Celestine, who 
founded with them the community known as that of the frames et pauperes heremitae domini Celestini. 
On the other hand, while the Pope was to act as mediator among the most powerful cardinals of Rome, 
there were some, like a Colonno and an Orsini, who secretly supported the new poverty movement, a 
truly curious choice for powerful men who lived in vast wealth and luxury; and I have never 
understood whether they simply exploited the Spirituals for their own political ends or whether in 
some way they felt they justified their carnal life


by supportin9the Spiritual trend. Perhaps both things were true, to judge by the little I can 
understand of Italian affairs. But to give an example, Ubertino had been taken on as chaplain by 
Cardinal Orsini when, having become the most respected among the Spirituals, he risked being 
accused
as a heretic. And the cardinal himself had protected Ubertino in Avignon.

As happens, however, in such cases, on the one hand Angelus and Ubertino preached according to 
doctrine, on the other, great masses of simple people accepted this preaching of theirs and spread 
through †he country, beyond all control. So I†aIy was invaded by †hese Fra†icelli or Friars of †he 
Poor Life, whom many considered dangerous. At this point it wos difficult to distinguish the 
spiritual masters, who maintained contact with the ecclesiastical authorities, from their simpler 
followers, who now lived outside the order, begging for alms and existing from day to day by the 
labor of their hands, holding no property of any kind. And these the populace now called 
Fraticelli, not unlike the French Beghards, who drew their inspiration from Pierre Olieu.

Celestine V was succeeded by Boniface VIII, and this Pope promptly demonstrated scant indulgence 
for Spiri†uols and Fra†icelli in general: in †he los† years of †he dying century he signed a bull, 
Firma cautelq, in which with one stroke he condemned bizochi, vagabond mendicants who roamed qbout 
at the far edge of the Franciscan order, and the Spirituals themselves, who hod left the life of 
the order and retired to a hermitage.

After the death of Boniface VIII, the Spirituals tried to obtain from certain of his successors, 
among them Clement V, permission to leave the order peaceably. I believe they would have succeeded, 
but the advent of John XXII robbed them of all hope. When he was elected in 1316, he wrote to the 
King of Sicily telling him to expel those monks from his lands, where many had taken refuge; and 
John had Angelus Clorenus and the Spirituals of Provence put in chains.

All cannot hove proceeded smoothly, and many in the curia resisted. The fact is that Ubertino and 
Clarenus managed to obtain permission to leave the order, and the former was received by the 
Benedictines, the latter by the Celestinians. But for those who continued to lead their free life 
John was merciless, and he had them persecuted by the Inquisition, and mqny were burned at the 
stake.

He realized, however, that to destroy the weed of the Fraticelli, who threatened the very 
foundation of the church's authority, he would need to condemn the notions on which their faith was 
based. They claimed that Christ and the apostles had owned no property, individually or in common: 
and the Pope condemned this idea as heretical. An amazing position, because there is no evident 
reqson why a pope should consider perverse the notion that Christ was poor: but only a year before, 
a general chapter of the Franciscans in Perugia had sustained this opinion, and in condemning the 
one, the Pope was condemning also the other. As hove I alreody said, the chopter was a great 
reverse in his struggle against the Emperor; this is the fact of the matter. So qfter that, many 
Fraticelli, who knew nothing of empire or of Perugia, were burned to death.

These thoughts were in my mind as I gazed on the legendary figure of Ubertino. My master introduced 
me, and the old man stroked my cheek, with a warm, almos† burning hand. A† the touch of his hand I 
understood many of the things I had heard about that holy mon and others I had read in the pages of 
his Arbor vitae crucifixae; I understood the mystic fire that had consumed him from his youth, 
when, though studying in Paris, he had withdrawn from theological speculation and had imagined


himself transformed into the penitent Magdalen; and then his intense associcttion with Saint 
Angeles of Foligno, who had initiated him into the riches of the mystic life and the adoration of 
the cross; and why his superiors, one day, alarmed by the ardor of his preaching, had sent him in 
retreat to La Verna.

I studied that face, its features sweet as those of the sainted woman with whom he had fraternally 
exchanged profound spiritual thoughts. I sensed he must have been able to assume a far harsher 
expression when, in 1311, the Council of Vienne, with the decretal Exivi de paradiso, had deposed 
Franciscan superiors hostile to the Spirituals, but had charged the latter to live in peace within 
the order; and this champion of renunciation had not accepted that shrewd compromise and had fought 
for the institution of a separate order, based on principles of maximum strictness. This great 
warrior
†hen los† his ba††le, for in †hose years John XXII was advocating a crusade agains† †he followers 
of Pierre Olieu (among whom Ubertino himself was numbered), and he condemned the monks of Narbonne 
and Béziers. But Ubertino had not hesitated to defend his friend's memory against the Pope, and, 
outdone by his sanctity, John had not dared condemn him (though he then condemned the others). On 
thot occasion, indeed, he offered Ubertino a way of saving himself, first advising him and then 
commanding him to enter the Cluniac order. Ubertino, apparently so disarmed and fragile, must hove 
been equally skillful in gaining protectors qnd allies in the papctl courts, qnd, in fact, he 
agreed to enter the monastery of Gemblach in Flanders, but I believe he never even went there, and 
he remained in Avignon, under the banner of Cardinal Orsini, to defend the Franciscans' cause.

Only in recent times (and the rumors I had heard were vague) his star at court had waned, he had 
had to leove Avignon, and the Pope had this indomitoble man pursued as o heretic who per mundum 
discurrit vagabundus. Then, it was said, all trace of him was lost. That afternoon I had learned, 
from the dialogue between William and the abbot, that he was hidden here in this abbey. And now I 
saw him before me.

“Williom,” he was soying, “they were on the point of killing me, you know. I had to flee in the 
dead of night.”

“Who wqnted to kill you* John*”

“No. John has never been fond of me, but he has never ceased to respect me. After all, he was the 
one who offered me a way of avoiding a trial ten years ago, commanding me to enter the 
Benedictines, and so silencing my enemies. They muttered for a long time, they woxed ironical on 
the foct thot o champion of poverty should enter such a rich order and live qt the court of 
Cardinal Orsini. .. William, you know my contempt for the things of this earth! But it was the way 
to remain in Avignon and defend my brothers. The Pope is afraid of Orsini, he would never have 
harmed a hair of my head. As recently as three years ago he sent me os his envoy to the King of 
Aragon.”
“Then who wished you ill*”
“All of them. The curia. They tried to assassinate me twice. They tried to silence me. You know 
what hoppened five years ago. The Beghards of Narbonne had been condemned two years before, and 
Berengar Talloni, though he was one of the judges, had appealed to the Pope. Those were difficult 
moments. John had already issued two bulls against the Spirituals, and even Michael of Cesena had 
given up—by the way, when does he arrive*”



"He will be here in two days' time.”

"Michael ... I have not seen him for so long. Now he has come around, he understands what we 
wanted, the Perugia chapter asserted thqt we were right. But then, still in 1318, he gave in to the 
Pope qnd turned over to him five Spirituals of Provence who were resisting submission. Burned, 
Williom ... Oh, it is horrible!“ He hid his face in his hands.

“But what exactly hoppened after Talloni's appeal*” William asked.

"John had to reopen the debate, you understand* He has to do it, because in the curia, too, there 
were men seized with doubt, even the Franciscans in the curia—pharisees, whited sepulchers, ready 
to sell themselves for a prebend, but they were seized with doubt. It was then that John asked me 
to draw up a memorial on poverty. It was a fine work, William, may God forgive my pride. “

“I hove read it. Michael showed it to me.”

"There were †he hesi†an†, even among our own men, †he Provinciol of Aquitaine, †he Cordinal of San 
Vitale, the Bishop of Kaffa. “

"An idio†," William said.

“Rest in peace. He was gathered to God two years ago.“

“God was not so compossionate. That was a folse report that arrived from Constantinople. He is 
still in our midst, and I am told he will be a member of the legation. God protect us!“

But he is favorable to the chapter of Perugia,“ Ubertino said.
“Exactly. He belongs to thqt race of men who are alwctys their ctdversary's best champions.“

“To tell the truth,“ Ubertino said, “even then he was no great help to the cause. And it all came 
to nothing, but at least the idea was not declared heretical, and this was important. And so the 
others hove never forgiven me. They hove †ried †o harm me in every way, †hey have said †ho† I was 
a†
Sachsenhausen three yectrs a9o, when Louis proclaimed John a heretic. And yet they all knew I was 
in Avignon that July with Orsini.  They found that parts of the Emperor‘s declaration reflected my
ideas. What madness.”

“Not ctll thctt mad," William said. “I had 9iven him the ideas, taking them from your Declaration 
of Avignon, and from some pages of Olieu.“

"You*” Ubertino exclaimed, between amazement and joy. “But then you agree with me!”

William seemed embarrossed. "They were the right ideas for the Emperor, at that moment,” he said 
evasively.



Ubertino looked at him suspiciously. “Ah, but you don't reqlly believe them, do you*”

“Tell me,” William said, “tell me how you saved yourself from those dogs.”

“Ah, dogs indeed, William. Rabid dogs. I found myself even in conflic† wi†h Bonagra†iq, you know*”

“But Bonagratia is on our side!”
“Now he is, after I spoke at length with him. Then he was convinced, ond he protested against the 
Ad conditorem canonum. And the Pope imprisoned him for a year.”
“I hove heard he is now close to a friend of mine in the curia, William of Occam.” “I knew him only 
slightly. I don't like him. A man without fervor, all head, no heart.” “But the head is beautiful.”
“Perhaps, and it will take him to hell.”

“Then I will see him again down there, and we will argue logic.”

“Hush, William,” Ubertino said, smiling with deep affection, “you are better than your 
philosophers. If only you had wanted ...”
“What*”
“When we saw each other the las† time in Umbria—remember*—l had jus† been cured of my ailments 
through the intercession of that marvelous woman ... Clare of Montefalco ...” he murmured, his face 
radiant. “Clare ... When female nature, naturally so perverse, becomes sublime through holiness, 
then i† can be †he nobles† vehicle of grace. You know how my life has been inspired by †he pures† 
chas†i†y, William”—he grasped my master's arm, convulsively—"you know with what ... fierce—yes, 
that's the word—with what fierce thirst for penance I have tried to mortify in myself the throbbing 
of the flesh, and make myself wholly transparent to the love of Jesus Crucified.  And yet, three 
women in
my life have been three celestial messengers for me. Angelo of Foligno, Margaret of Citto di 
Costello (who revealed the end of my book to me when I had written only a third of it), and finally 
Clare of Montefalco. It was a reward from heaven that I, yes, I, should investigate her miracles 
and proclaim her sainthood to the crowds, before Holy Mother Church moved. And you were there, 
William, and you could hove helped me in that holy endeavor, and you would not—”

“But the holy endeavor that you invited me to share was sending Bentivenga, Jacomo, and 
Giovannuccio to the stake,” William said softly.
“They were besmirching her memory with their perversions. And you were on inquisitor!”


“And that was precisely why I asked to be relieved of that position. I did not like the business. 
Nor did I like—I shall be frank—the way you induced Bentivenga to confess his errors. You pretended 
you wished to enter his sect, if sect it was; you stole his secrets from him, and you had him 
arrested.”

“But that is the way to proceed against the enemies of Christ! They were heretics, they were Pseudo 
Apostles, they reeked of the sulphur of Fro Dolcino!”
“They were Clare's friends.”
“No, William, you must not cast even the hint of a shadow on Clare‘s memory.” “But they were 
associated with her.”
“They were Minorites, they called themselves Spirituals, and instead they were monks of the 
community! Bu† you know i† emerged clearly a† †he †riaI †ha† Ben†ivenga of Gubbio proclaimed 
himself an apostle, and then he and Giovonnuccio of Bevagno seduced nuns, telling them hell does 
not exist,
†ha† carnal desires can be satisfied wi†hou† offending God, †ha† †he body of Chris† (Lord, forgive 
me!) can be received after a man has Iain with a nun, that the Magdalen found more favor in the 
Lord‘s sight than the virgin Agnes, that what the vulgar call the Devil is God Himself, because the 
Devil is knowledge and God is by definition knowledge! And it was the blessed Clare, after hearing 
this talk, who had the vision in which God Himself told her they were wicked followers of the 
Spiritus Libertatis!”
“They were Minorites whose minds were aflame with the same visions as Clare's, and often the step
between ecs†a†ic vision and sinful frenzy is very brief,” William said.

Ubertino wrung his hands and his eyes were again veiled with tears. “Don’† soy †ho†, William. How 
can you confound the moment of ecstatic love, which burns the viscera with the perfume of incense, 
and the disorder of the senses, which reeks of sulphur* Bentivenga urged others to touch a body's 
naked limbs; he declared this wets the only way to freedom from the dominion of the senses, homo 
nudus cum nuda iacebat, 'naked they lay together, man and woman. ' ”

“E† non commisceban†ur ad invicem, bu† †here was no conjunction.”

“Lies! They were seeking pleasure, and they found it. If carnal stimulus was felt, they did not 
consider it a sin if, to satisfy it, man and woman lay together, and the one touched and kissed the 
other in every part, and naked belly was joined to naked belly!”

I confess. †ha† †he way Ubertino s†igma†ized †he vice of o†hers did no† inspire virtuous †hou9h†s 
in me. My master must have realized I was agitated, and he interrupted the holy man.

“Yours is an ardent spirit, Ubertino, both in love of God and in hatred of evil. What I meant is 
that there is little difference between the ardor of the serophim and the ardor of Lucifer, because 
they are always born from an extreme igniting of †he will.”


“Oh, there is a difference, qnd I know it!" Ubertino said, inspired. "You mean that between 
desiring good and desiring evil there is a brief step, because it is always a matter of directing 
the will. This is true. But the difference lies in the object, and the object is clearly 
recognizable. God on this side, the Devil on that.“
"And I fear I no longer know how to distinguish, Ubertino. Wasn't it your Angela of Foligno who 
told of that day when her spirit was transported and she found herself in the sepulcher of Christ* 
Didn't she tell how first she kissed his breast and saw him lying with his eyes closed, then she 
kissed his mouth, and there rose from those lips an ineffoble sweetness, and after a brief pause 
she loy her cheek against the cheek of Christ and Christ put his hand to her cheek and pressed her 
to him and—as she said—her happiness became sublime* ...”

“What does this have to do with the urge of the senses*” Ubertino asked. “It wos a mystical 
experience, and the body was our Lord's."
“Perhaps I am accustomed to Oxford,“ William said, “where even mystical experience was of another

“All in the head.” Ubertino smiled.

"Or in the eyes. God perceived as light, in the rays of the sun, the images of mirrors, the 
diffusion of colors over the ports of ordered matter, in the reflections of daylight on wet leaves 
... Isn't this love closer to Francis's when he praises God in His creatures, flowers, grass, 
water, air* I don't believe this type of love can produce any snare. Whereas I'm suspicious of a 
love that transmutes into a colloquy with the Almighty the shudders felt in fleshly contacts.  ”

"You blaspheme, Williom! It is not the same thing. There is on immense abyss between the high 
ecstasy of the heart loving Christ Crucified and the base, corrupt ecstasy of the Pseudo Apostles 
of Montefalco. “
"They were not Pseudo Apostles, they were Brothers of the Free Spirit: you said as much yourself.”
"What difference is there* You haven't heard everything about that trial, I myself never dared 
record certain confessions, for fear of casting, if only for a moment, the shadow of the Devil on 
the atmosphere of sanctity Clqre had created in that place. But I learned certain things, certain 
things, William! They gathered at night in a cellar, they took a newborn boy, they threw him from 
one to another until he died, of blows ... or other causes.  And he who caught him alive for the 
last time, and
held him as he died, became the leader of the sect.  And the child‘s body was torn to pieces and
mixed with flour, to make blasphemous hosts!" "Ubertino,” William said firmly, "these things were 
said, many centuries ago, by †he Armenian bishops, abou† †he sec† of †he Poulicians. And abou† †he 
Bogomils.”

“What does thot matter* The Devil is stubborn, he follows a pattern in his snares and his 
seductions, he repeats his rituals at a distance of millennia, he is always the same, this is 
precisely why he is recognized as the enemy! I swear to you. They lighted canes on Easter night and 
took maidens into the cellar. Then they extinguished the candles and threw themselves on the 
maidens, even if they were


bound †o †hem by †ies of blood.  And if from †his conjunction ct baby was born, †he infernal ri†e 
was
resumed, all around a little jar of wine, which they called the keg, and they became drunk and 
would cut the baby to pieces, and pour its blood into the goblet, and they threw babies on the 
fire, still alive, and they mixed the baby's ashes and his blood, and drank!”

“But Michael Psellus wrote this in his book on the workings of devils three hundred years ago! Who 
told you these things*”
“They did. Bentivenga and the others, and under torture!”
“There is only one thing that arouses animals more than pleasure, and that is pain. Under torture 
you are as if under the dominion of those grosses that produce visions. Everything you have heard 
told, everything you have read returns to your mind, as if you were being transported, not toward 
heaven, but toward hell. Under torture you say not only what the inquisitor wants, but also what 
you imagine migh† please him, because a bond (this, truly, diabolical) is established between you 
and him.  These
things I know, Ubertino; I also have belonged to those groups of men who believe they can produce 
the truth with white-hot iron. Well, let me tell you, the white hectt of truth comes from another 
flctme.
Under torture Ben†ivenga may have told the mos† absurd lies, because i† was no longer himself 
speaking, but his lust, the devils of his soul.”


“Yes, there is a lust for pain, as there is a lust for adoration, and even a lust for humility. If 
it took so little to make the rebellious angels direct their ardor away from worship and humility 
toward pride and revolt, what con we expect of a human being* There, now you know: this was the 
thought that struck me in the course of my inquisitions. And this is why I gqve up that activity. I 
lacked the courage to investigate the weaknesses of the wicked, because I discovered they are the 
some as the weaknesses of the saintly.”

Ubertino hqd listened to William's last words as if not understanding them. From the old man‘s 
expression, as i† become filled wi†h affec†iono†e commisera†ion, I reolized he considered Williom 
prey to culpable sentiments, which he forgave because he loved my master greatly. Ubertino 
interrupted him and said in a very bitter voice, “It does not matter. If that was how you felt, you 
were right to stop. Temptotions must be fought. Still, I lacked your support; with it, we could 
have routed thot band. And instead, you know what happened, I myself was accused of being weak 
toward them, and I was suspected of heresy. You were weak also, in fighting evil. Evil, William! 
Will this condemnation never cease, this shadow, this mire that prevents us from arriving at the 
holy source*” He moved still closer to Williom, as if he were ofraid someone might overhear.

“Here, too, even among these walls consecrated to prayer, you know*”

“I know. The abbo† has spoken †o me; in lac†, he asked me †o help him shed ligh† on i†.”

“Then observe, investigate, look with a lynx‘s eye in both directions: lust and pride. ”



"Yes, lust. There was something ... feminine, and therefore diabolical, about that young man who is 
dead. He had the eyes of a maiden seeking commerce with an incubus. But I said 'pride’ also, the 
pride of †he in†eIIec†, in †his monastery consecrated †o †he pride of †he word, †o †he illusion of 
wisdom.“
"If you know something, help me.”
"I know nothing. There is nothing that I know. But the heart senses certain things. Let your heart 
speak, question faces, do not listen to tongues.  But come, why must we talk of these sod things 
and
frighten this young friend of ours*" He looked at me with his pale-blue eyes, grazing my cheek with 
his long white fingers, and I instinctively almost withdrew; I controlled myself and was right to 
do so, because I would have offended him, and his intention was pure. "Tell me of yourself 
instead,“ he said, turning‘ again to William. “What have you done since then* It has been—“
"Eighteen years. I went back to my country. I resumed studying at Oxford. I studied nature.”
“Nature is good becctuse she is the daughter of God,” Ubertino said.

“And God must be good, since He generated nature,” William said with a smile. "I studied, I met 
some very wise friends. Then I came to know Marsilius, I was attracted by his ideas about empire, 
the people, about a new law for the kingdoms of the earth, qnd so I ended up in that group of our 
brothers who are advising †he Emperor. Bu† you know †hese †hings: I wro†e you. I rejoiced o† Bobbio 
when †hey told me you were here. We believed you were lost. But now that you are with us you can be 
of great help in a few days, when Michael also arrives. It will be a harsh conflict with Berengar 
Talloni. I really believe we will have some omusement.”

Ubertino looked at him with a tentative smile. "I can never tell when you Englishmen are speaking 
seriously. There is nothing amusing about such a serious question. At stake is the survival of the 
order, which is your order: and in my hear† i† is mine, too. Bu† I shall implore Michael no† to go 
to Avignon.
John wants him, seeks him, invites him too insistently. Don‘t trust that old Frenchman. O Lord, 
into what hands has Thy church fallen!“ He turned his head toward the altar. "Transformed into 
harlot, weakened by luxury, she roils in lust like a snake in heat! From the naked purity of the 
stable of Bethlehem, made of wood as the lignum vitae of the cross was wood, to the bacchanalia of 
gold and stone! Look, look here: you hove seen the doorway! There is no escaping the pride of 
images! The days of the Antichrist qre finally at hand, and I qm afraid, William!” He looked 
around, staring wide-eyed among the dark naves, as if the Antichrist were going to appear any 
moment, and I actually expected to glimpse him. "His lieutenants are already here, dispatched as 
Christ dispatched the apostles into the world! They are trampling on the City of God, seducing 
through deceit, hypocrisy, violence. It will be then that God will have to send His servants, 
Elijah qnd Enoch, whom He maintained alive in the earthly paradise so that one day they may 
confound the Antichrist, and they will come to prophesy clad in sackcloth, and they will preach 
penance by word and by example.  “
“They have already come, Ubertino,” William said, indicating his Franciscan habit.


“But they have not yet triumphed; this is the moment when the Antichrist, filled with rqge, will 
command †he killing of Enoch and Elijah ond †he exposure of †heir bodies for all †o see and †hus be 
afraid of imitating them. Just as they wanted to kill me. ”

At that moment, terrified, I thought Ubertino was in the power of a kind of holy frenzy, and I 
feqred for his reason. Now, with the distance of time, knowing what I know—namely, that two years 
later he would be mysteriously killed in a German city by a murderer never discovered—I am all the 
more terrified, because obviously that evening Ubertino was prophesying.

“The abbot Joachim spoke the truth, you know. We have reached the sixth era of human history, when 
two Antichrists will appear, the mystic Antichrist and the Antichrist proper. This is happening 
now, in the sixth era, after Francis appeared to receive in his own flesh the five wounds of Jesus 
Crucified.
Boniface was the mystic An†ichris†, and the abdication of Celes†ine was no† valid. Boniface was the 
beast that rises up from the sea whose seven heads represent the offenses to the deadly sins and 
whose ten horns the offenses to the commandments, and the cardinals who surrounded him were the 
locusts, whose body is Apollyon! But the number of the beast, if you read the name in Greek 
letters, is Benedicti!” He stared at me to see whether I had understood, and he revised a finger, 
cctutioning me: "Benedict XI was the Antichrist proper, the beast that rises up from the earth! God 
allowed such a monster of vice and iniquity to govern His church so that his successor‘s virtues 
would blaze with
!•y^
“Bu†, Sain†ed Fo†her,” I replied in a foin† voice, summoning my courage, “his successor is John!”

Ubertino pu† a hand †o his brow as if †o dispel a troublesome dream. He was breathing wi†h 
difficulty; he was tired. “True, the calculations were wrong, we ore still awaiting the Angelic 
Pope.  But
meanwhile Francis and Dominic have appeared.” He raised his eyes to heqven and said, qs if praying 
(but I was sure he was quoting a poge of his great book on the tree of life): “Quorum primus 
seraphico calculo purgatus et ardore celico inflammatus totum incendere videbatur. Secundus vero 
verbo predicationis fecundus super mundi tenebras clarius rodiavit. ... Yes, these were the 
promises: the Angelic Pope must come.”

“And so be it, Ubertino,” William said. “Meanwhile, I am here to prevent the human Emperor from 
being deposed. Your Angelic Pope was also preached by Fra Dolcino. ”

“Never utter again the name of thot serpent!” Ubertino cried, and for the first time I sow his 
sorrow turn into rage. “He has befouled the words of Joachim of Calabria, and has made them 
bringers of death and filth! Messenger of the Antichrist if ever there was one! But you, William, 
speak like this because you do not really believe in the odvent of the Antichrist, and your masters 
at Oxford hove taught you to idolize reason, drying up the prophetic capacities of your heart!”

“You are mistaken, Ubertino,” William answered very seriously. “You know that among my masters I 
venerate Roger Bacon more than any other. ”

“Who raved of flying machines,” Ubertino muttered bitterly.



“Who spoke clearly and calmly of the Antichrist, and was qware of the import of the corruption of 
the world and the decline of learning. He taught, however, thot there is only one way to prepare 
agoinst his coming: study the secrets of nature, use knowledge to better the human race. We can 
prepare to figh† †he An†ichris† by studying †he curative properties of herbs, †he na†ure of s†ones, 
and even by planning those flying machines thqt make you smile.”
“Your Bacon's Antichrist was a pretext for cultivating intellectual pride.” “A holy pretext.”
“Nothing pretextuol is holy. William, you know I love you. You know I have greot faith in you. 
Mortify your intelligence, leorn to weep over the wounds of the Lord, throw away your books.”

“I will devote myself only to yours.” William smiled.

Ubertino also smiled and waved a threatening finger at him. “Foolish Englishman. Do not lough too 
much at your fellows. Those whom you cctnnot love you should, rctther, fectr. And be on your guard 
here at
†he abbey. I do no† like †his ploce.”
“I want to know it better, in fact,” William said, taking his leave. “Come, Adso.”

“I tell you i† is no† good, and you reply †ha† you won† to know i† better. Ah!” Ubertino soid, 
shaking his head.

“By the way,” William said, already halfway down the nave, “who is that monk who looks like an 
animal and speqks the language of Bqbel*”

“Salvatore*” Ubertino, who had already knelt down, turned. “I believe he was a gift of mine to this 
abbey ... along wi†h †he cellarer. When I pu† aside †he Franciscon habi† I returned for a while †o 
my old convent at Cqsqle, qnd there I found other monks in difficulty, because the community 
accused them of being Spirituals of my sect ... as they put it. I exerted myself in their fovor, 
procuring permission for them to follow my example. And two, Salvatore and Remigio, I found here 
when I arrived last year. Salvatore ... he does indeed look like an animal. But he is obliging.”
William hesitated a moment. “I heard him say Penitenziqgite.”

Ubertino was silen†. He waved one hand, as if †o drive off a bo†hersome †hough†. “No, I don‘† 
believe so. You know how these lay brothers are. Country people, who hove perhaps heard some 
wandering preacher and don't know what they are sayin9. I would have other reproaches to make to 
Sctlvatore: he is a greedy animal and lustful. But nothing, nothing against orthodoxy. No, the 
sickness of the abbey is
something else: seek it among those who know too much, not in those who know nothing. Don't build a
castle of suspicions on one word.”
“I would never do that,” William answered. “I gave up being on inquisitor precisely to avoid doing 
that. But I like also to listen to words, and then I think about them.”


“You think too much. Boy,” he said, addressing me, “don't learn too mctny bad examples from your 
master. The only thing that must be pondered—and I realize this at the end of my life—is death. 
Mors est quies viatoris—finis est omnis laboris. Let me pray now.”

TOWARD NONES
In which William has a very erudite conversation with Severinus the herbalist.
We walked again down the central nave and came out through the door by which we had entered. I 
could s†iII hear Ubertino’s words, all of †hem, buzzing in my head. “Tho† man is ... odd,” I dared 
say †o William.
“He is, or has been, in many ways a 9•eat man. But for this very reason he is odd. It is only petty 
men who seem normal. Ubertino could have become one of the heretics he helped burn, or a cardinal 
of the holy Roman church. He came very close to both perversions. When I talk with Ubertino I hove 
the impression thctt hell is heaven seen from the other side.”
I did not grasp his meaning. “From what side*” I asked.

“Ah, true,” William acknowledged the problem. “It is a matter of knowing whether there are sides 
and whether there is a whole. But poy no attention to me. And stop looking at that doorway,” he 
said, striking me lightly on the nape as I was turning, attracted by the sculptures I had seen on 
entering. “They have frightened you enough for today. All of them.”

As I turned back to the exit, I saw in front of me ctnother monk. He could hqve been William's 
ctge. He smiled and greeted us cordially. He said he was Severinus of Sankt Wendel, and he was the 
brother herbalist, in charge of the balneary, the infirmary, the gardens, and he was ours to 
command if we would like to learn our way better around the abbey compound.
William thonked him and said he hod alreody remarked, on coming in, the very fine vegetable garden, 
where it looked to him as if not only edible plants were grown, but also medicinal ones, from what 
he could tell, given the snow.

“In summer or spring, through the variety of its plants, each then adorned with its flowers, this 
garden sings better the praises of the Creator,” Severinus said, somewhat apologetically. “But even 
now, in winter, the herbalist's eye sees through the dry branches the plants that will come, and he 
can tell you that this garden is richer than any herbal ever was, and more voricolored, beautiful 
as the illuminations are in those volumes. Furthermore, good herbs grow nlso in winter, and I 
preserve others gathered and ready in †he po†s in my laboratory. And so wi†h †he roo†s of †he wood 
sorrel I †rea† catarrhs, and with the decoction of althea roots I make plasters for skin diseases; 
burrs cicatrize eczemas; by chopping and grinding the snakeroot rhizome I treat diarrheas and 
certain female complaints; pepper is a fine digestive; coltsfoot eases the cough: and we have good 
gentian also for the digestion, and I have glycyrrhiza, and juniper for making excellent infusions, 
and elder bark with which I make a decoction for the liver, soapwort, whose roots are macerated in 
cold water for catarrh, and valerian, whose properties you surely know.”



“You have widely varied herbs, and suited to different climates. How do you manage that*”
“On the one hand, I owe it to the mercy of the Lord, who set our high plain between a range that 
overlooks the sea †o †he sou†h and receives i†s warm winds, qnd †he higher mountain †o †he nor†h 
whose sylvan balsams we receive. And on the other hand, I owe it to my art, which, unworthily, I 
learned at the wish of my masters. Certain plants will grow even in an adverse climate if you take 
care of †he terrain around †hem, and †heir nourishmen†, and †heir grow†h.”
“But you also have plants that are 9 od only to eat*” I asked.
“Ah, my hungry young colt, there are no plants good for food that are not good for treating the 
body, too, provided they are taken in the right quantity. Only excess makes them cause illness. 
Consider the pumpkin. It is cold and damp by nature and slakes thirst, but if you eat it when 
rotten it gives you diarrhea and you mus† bind your viscera wi†h a pos†e of brine and mustard. And 
onions* Warm and damp, in small quantities they enhance coitus (for those who hove not token our 
vows, naturally), but
†oo many bring on a hectviness of †he head, †o be combated wi†h milk and vinegar. A good rectson,” 
he added slyly, “why a young monk should always ea† them sparingly. Ea† garlic instead. Warm and 
dry, i† is good against poisons. But do not use it to excess, for it causes too many humors to be 
expelled from the brain. Beans, on the contrary, produce urine and are fattening, two very good 
things. But they induce bad dreams. Fqr less, however, than certain other herbs. There are some 
that actually provoke evil visions.”
“Which*” I asked.
“Aha, our novice wants to know too much. These are things thctt only the herbalist must know; 
otherwise any thoughtless person could go about distributing visions: in other words, lying with 
herbs.”

“But you need only a bit of nettle,” William said then, “or roybro or olieribus to be protected 
against such visions. I hope you have some of †hese good herbs.” Severinus gave my mas†er q 
sidelong glance. “You are interested in herbalism*”

“Just a little,” William said modestly, “since I came upon the Theatrum Sanitatis of Ububchasym de 
Boldach ..”
“Abul Asan aI-Muchtar ibn-BotIan.”
“Or Ellucosim Elimittar: as you prefer. I wonder whether a copy is to be found here.” “One of the 
most beautiful. With many rich illustrations.”
“Heaven be praised. And the De virtutibm herbarum of Platearius*”

“Tha†, †oo. And †he De pIan†is of Aris†o†le, †ransIa†ed by Alfred of Sareshel.”



“I hqve heard it said that Aristotle did not really write that work," William remarked, “just as he 
was not the author of the De causis, it has been discovered.”

"In any event it is a great book,” Severinus observed, and my master agreed most readily, not 
asking whether †he herbalis† was speaking of †he De pIan†is or of †he De causu, bo†h works †ha† I 
did no† know bu† which, from †ho† conversation, I deduced mus† be very greo†.
"I shall be happy,“ Severinus concluded, "to have some frank conversation with you about herbs.“ “I 
shall be still happier," William said, “but would we not be breaking the rule of silence, which I
believe obtains in your order*“

"The Rule,” Severinus soid, "has been adopted over the centuries to the requirements of the 
different communities. The Rule prescribed the lectio divina but not study, and yet you know how 
much our order has developed inquiry into divine ond humon affairs. Also, the Rule prescribes a 
common dormitory, but at times it is right that the monks have, as we do here, chances to meditate 
also during the night, and so each of them is given his own cell. The Rule is very rigid on the 
question of silence, and here with us, not only the monk who performs manuol labor but also those 
who write or read must no† converse wi†h †heir brothers. Bu† †he abbey is firs† and foremos† a 
community of scholars, and often it is useful for monks to exchange the accumulated treasures of 
their learning. All conversation regarding our studies is considered legitimate and profitable, 
provided it does not take place in the refectory or during †he hours of †he holy offices.”
"Had you much occasion to talk with Adelmo of Otranto*” William asked abruptly.

Severinus did not seem surprised. "I see the abbot has already spoken with you,“ he said. "No. I 
did not converse with him often. He spent his time illuminating. I did hear him on occasion talking 
with other monks, Venantius of Salvemec, or Jorge of Burgos, about the nature of his work. Besides, 
I don't spend my day in the scriptorium, but in my laboratory.” And he nodded toward the infirmary 
building.
“I understand,“ William said. “So you don't know whether Adelmo had visions.”
"Visions*"
“Like the ones your herbs induce, for example."
Severinus stiffened. "I told you: I store the dangerous herbs with great care.”
"That is not what I meant,” William hastened to clarify. "I was speaking of visions in general.“

"I don't understand,” Severinus insisted.

"I was thinking †ha† a monk who wanders a† nigh† abou† †he Aedificium, where, by †he abbo†’s 
admission ... terrible things can happen ... to those who enter during forbidden hours—well, as I 
say, I was thinking he might have had diabolical visions that drove him to the precipice.”



“I told you: I don‘t visit the scriptorium, except when I need a book; but as a rule I have my own 
herbaria, which I keep in the infirmary. As I said, Adelmo was very close to Jorge, Venantius, and 
... naturally, Berengar.”

Even I sensed the slight hesitation in Severinus‘s voice. Nor did it escape my master. “Berengar* 
And
why 'naturally‘*”

“Berengar of Arundel, the ossistant librarian. They were of an age, they had been novices together, 
it was normal for them to have things to talk about. That is what I meant.”

“Ah, that is what you meant,” William repeated. And to my surprise he did not pursue the matter. In 
fact, he promptly chonged the subject. “But perhaps it is time for us to visit the Aedificium. Will 
you act as our guide*”

“Gladly,” Severinus said, with all-too-evident relief. He led us along the side of the garden and 
brought us to the west fasade of the Aedificium.
“Facing the garden is the door leading to the kitchen,” he said, “but the kitchen occupies only the 
western half of the ground floor: in the other half is the refectory. And at the south entrance, 
which you reach from behind the choir in the church, there are two other doors leading to the 
kitchen and
†he refectory. Bu† we can go in here, because from †he kitchen we can †hen go on through †o †he 
refectory.”

As I entered the vast kitchen, I realized that the entire height of the Aedificium enclosed on 
octagonal court: I understood later thqt this wqs a kind of huge well, without any qccess, onto 
which, a† each floor, opened broad windows, like †he ones on †he exterior. The kitchen wos a vas† 
smoke- filled entrance hall, where many servants were already busy preparing the food for supper. 
On a great table two of them were moking a pie of greens, barley, oats, and rye, chopping turnips, 
cress, radishes, and carrots. Nearby, another cook hqd just finished poaching some fish in a 
mixture of wine and water, and was covering them with a sauce of sage, parsley, thyme, garlic, 
pepper, and salt.

Beneath the west tower an enormous oven opened, for baking bread; it was already flashing with 
reddish flames. In the south tower there was an immense fireplace, where great pots were boiling 
and spits were turnin9. Through the door that opened onto the bctrnyard behind the church, the 
swineherds were entering at that, moment, carrying the meat of the slaughtered pigs. We went out 
through that same door and found ourselves in the yard, at the far eastern end of the plain, 
against the walls, where there were mony buildings. Severinus explained to me that the first was 
the series of barns, then there stood the horses' stables, then those for the oxen, and then 
chicken coops, and the covered yard for the sheep. Outside the pigpens, swineherds were stirring a 
great jarful of the blood of the freshly slaughtered pigs, to keep it from coagulating. If it was 
stirred properly and promptly, it would remain liquid for the next few days, thanks to the cold 
climate, and then they would make blood puddings from it.

We re-entered the Aedificium and cast a quick glance at the refectory as we crossed it, heading 
toward the east tower. Of the two towers between which the refectory extended, the northern one


housed a fireplace, the other ct circular staircase that led to the scriptorium, on the floor 
above. By this staircase the monks went up to their work every day, or else they used the other two 
staircases, less comfortable but well heated, which rose in spirals inside the fireplace here and 
inside the oven in the kitchen.

William asked whether we would find anyone in the scriptorium, since it was Sunday. Severinus 
smiled and said that work, for the Benedictine monk, is prayer. On Sunday offices lasted longer, 
but the monks assigned to work on books still spent some hours up there, usually engaged in 
fruitful exchanges of learned observations, counsel, reflections on Holy Scripture.

AFTER NONES
In which there is a visit to the scriptorium, and a meetin9 withmany scholars, copyists, and 
rubricators, as well as an old blind mon who is expecting the Antichrist.

As we climbed up I sctw my master observing the windows thqt gave light to the stairway. I wqs 
probably becoming as clever as he, because I immediately noticed †ha† †heir position would make i† 
difficult for a person to reach them. On the other hand, the windows of the refectory (the only 
ones on the ground floor that overlooked the cliff face) did not seem easily reached, either, since 
below them there was no furniture of any kind.

When we reached the top of the stairs, we went through the east tower into the scriptorium, and 
there I could not suppress a cry of wonder. This floor was not divided in two like the one below, 
and therefore it appeared to my eyes in all its spacious immensity. The ceilings, curved and not 
too high (lower than in a church, but still higher than in any chapter house I ever saw), supported 
by sturdy pillars, enclosed a space suffused with the most beautiful light, because three enormous 
windows opened on each of the longer sides, whereas a smaller window pierced each of the five 
external sides of each tower: eight high, narrow windows, finally, allowed light to enter from the 
octagonal central well.

The abundance of windows meant that the great room was cheered by a constant diffused light, even 
on a winter afternoon. The panes were not colored like church windows, and the lead-framed squares 
of clear glass allowed the light to enter in the purest possible fashion, not modulated by human 
art, and thus to serve its purpose, which was to illuminate the work of rectdin9and writing. I have 
seen at other times and in other places many scriptoria, but none where there shone so luminously, 
in the
outpouring, of physical light which made the room glow, the spiritual principle that light 
incarnates, radiance, source of all beauty and learning, inseparable attribute of that proportion 
the room embodied. For †hree †hings concur in crect†ing bectu†y. firs† of all in†egri†y or 
perfection, and for †his reason we consider ugly all incomplete things; then proper proportion or 
consonance; and finally clarity and light, and in fact we call beautiful those things of definite 
color. And since the sight of the beautiful implies peace, and since our appetite is calmed 
similarly by peacefulness, by the good, and by the beautiful, I fel† myself filled with a grea† 
consolation and I though† how pleasan† i† mus† be to work in thot place.


As it appeared to my eyes, at that afternoon hour, it seemed to me ct joyous workshop of learning. 
I sow Io†er a† S†. Gall a scrip†orium of similar proportions, also separated from †he library (in 
o†her convents the monks worked in the same place where the books were kept), but not so 
beautifully arranged as this one. Antiquarians, librarians, rubricators, and scholars were seated, 
each at his own desk, and there wqs a desk under each of the windows. And since there were forty 
windows (a number truly perfect, derived from the decupling of the quadragon, as if the Ten 
Commandments had been multiplied by the four cardinal virtues), forty monks could work at the same 
time, though at that moment there were perhaps thirty. Severinus explained to us that monks working 
in the scriptorium were exempted from the offices of terce, sext, and nones so they would not have 
to leave their work during the hours of daylight, and they stopped their activity only at sunset, 
for vespers.
The brightest places were reserved for the antiquarians, the most expert illuminators, the 
rubricators, and the copyists. Each desk had everything required for illuminating and copying: 
inkhorns, fine quills which some monks were sharpening with a thin knife, pumice stone for 
smoothing the parchment, rulers for drawing the lines thot the writing would follow. Next to each 
scribe, or at the top of the sloping desk, there was a lectern, on which the codex to be copied was 
placed, the page covered by ct sheet with a cut-out window which framed the line being copied ctt 
thctt moment. And some had inks of gold and various colors. Other monks were simply reading books, 
and they wrote down their annotations in their personal notebooks or on tablets.
I did not have time, however, to observe their work, because the librarian came to us. We already 
knew he was Malochi of Hildesheim. His foce was †rying †o assume on expression of welcome, bu† I 
could not help shuddering at the sight of such a singular countenance. He was tall and extremely 
thin, with large and awkward limbs. As he took his great strides, cloaked in the black habit of the 
order, there was something upsetting about his appearance. The hood, which was still raised since 
he had come in from outside, cast a shadow on the pallor of his face and gqve ct certain suffering 
quality to his large melancholy eyes. In his physiognomy there were what seemed traces of many 
passions which his will had disciplined but which seemed to have frozen those features they had now 
ceased to animate. Sadness and severity predominated in the lines of his face, and his eyes were so 
intense thot with one glctnce they could penetrctte the heart of the person speaking to him, and 
read the secret thoughts, so it was difficult to tolerate their inquiry and one was not tempted to 
meet them a second time.

The librarian introduced us to many of the monks who were working at that moment. Of each, Molochi 
also told us what task he was performin9, and I admired the deep devotion of all to knowledge and 
to the study of the divine word. Thus I met Venantius of Salvemec, translator from the Greek and 
the Arabic, devoted to that Aristotle who surely was the wisest of all men. Benno of Uppsala, a 
young Scandinavian monk who was studying rhetoric. Aymaro of Alessandria, who had been copying 
works on loan to the library for a few months only, and then a group of illumincttors from various 
countries, Patrick of Clonmocnois, Robano of Toledo, Magnus of Iona, Waldo of Hereford.
The list could surely go on, and there is nothing more wonderful than a list, instrument of 
wondrous hypotyposis. But I must come to the subject of our discussion, from which emerged many 
useful indications as †o †he na†ure of †he sub†Ie uneasiness among †he monks, and some concerns, 
no† expressed, that still weighed on all our conversations.


My master began speaking with Malachi, praising the beauty and the industry of the scriptorium and 
asking him for information abou† †he procedure for †he work done †here, because, he said very 
acutely, he had heard this library spoken of everywhere and would like to examine many of the 
books. Malachi explained to him what the abbot had already said: the monk asked the librarian for 
the work he wished to consult and the librarian then went to fetch it from the library above, if 
the request was justified and devout. William asked how he could find out the names of the books 
kept in the cases upstairs, and Malachi showed him, fixed by a little gold chain to his own desk, a 
voluminous codex covered with very thickly written lists.
William slipped his hands inside his habit, at the point where it billowed over his chest to make a 
kind of sock, and he drew from it an object that I had already seen in his hands, and on his face, 
in the course of our journey. It was a forked pin,. so constructed thot it could stay on a man‘s 
nose (or at least on his, so prominent and oquiline) as a rider remains astride his horse or as a 
bird clings to its perch. And, one on either side of the fork, before the eyes, there were two 
ovals of metal, which held two almonds of glass, thick as the bottom of a tumbler. William 
preferred to read with these before his eyes, and he said they made his vision better than what 
nature had endowed him with or than his advanced qge, especially as the daylight fqiled, would 
permit. They did not serve him to see from a distance, for †hen his eyes were, on †he contrary, 
qui†e sharp, bu† †o see close up. Wi†h †hese lenses he could read manuscripts penned in very faint 
letters, which even I had some trouble deciphering. He explained to me that, when a man had passed 
the middle point of his life, even if his sight had always been excellent, the eye hardened and the 
pupil became recalcitrant, so that many learned men had virtually died, as far as reading and 
writing were concerned, after their fiftieth summer. A grave misfortune for men who could have 
given the best fruits of their intellect for many more years. So the Lord was to be praised since 
someone had devised and constructed this instrument. And he told me this in support of the ideas of 
his Roger Bacon, who had said that the aim of learning was also to prolong humqn life.
The other monks looked at William with great curiosity but did not dare ask him questions. And I 
noticed that, even in a place so zeolously and proudly dedicated to reading and writing, that 
wondrous instrument had not yet arrived. I felt proud to be ctt the side of a mctn who had 
something with which
†o dumbfound o†her men famous in †he world for †heir wisdom.
With those objects on his eyes William bent over the lists inscribed in the codex. I looked, too, 
and we found titles of books we had never before heard of, and others mos† famous, †ho† the library 
possessed.

"De pen†agono Salomonis, Ars loquendi e† in†eIligendi in lingua hebraica, De rebus me†aIIicis by 
Roger of Hereford, Algebra by Al-Kuworizmi, †ransIa†ed in†o La†in by Rober†us Anglicus, †he Punica 
of Silius Italicus, the Gesta francorum, De laudibus sanctae crucis by Robanus Maurus, and Flavii 
Claudii Giordoni de ae†o†e mundi e† hominis reserva†is singulis li††eris per singulos libros ab A 
usque ad Z,” my master read. “Splendid works. But in what order are they listed*“ He quoted from a 
text I did not know but which was certainly familiar to Malachi: “ ’The librarian must have a list 
of all books, carefully ordered by subjects and authors, and they mus† be classified on the shelves 
with numerical indications.’ How do you know †he collocation of each book*“



Malachi showed him some annotations beside each title. I reqd: “iii, IV gradus, V in prima 
graecorum"; "ii, V gradus, VII in tertia anglorum,” and so on. I understood thot the first number 
indicated the position of the book on the shelf or gradus, which was in turn indicated by the 
second number, while the case was indicated by the third number; and I understood also that the 
other phrases designated a room or a corridor of the library, and I made bold to ask further 
information about these last distinctions. Malachi looked at me sternly: “Perhaps you do not know, 
or have forgotten, that only the librarian is allowed access to the library. It is therefore right 
and sufficient that only the librarian know how to decipher these things.”

“But in what order are the books recorded in this list*” William asked. “Not by subject, it seems 
to me.” He did not suggest on order by author, following the same sequence as the letters of the 
alphabet, for this is a system I have seen adopted only in recent years, and at that time it was 
rarely used.

“The library da†es back †o †he earlier† †imes,” Molochi said, “and †he books are registered in 
order of their acquisition, donation, or entrance within our walls.”

“They are difficult to find, then,” William observed.

“I† is enough for †he librarian †o know †hem by hear† and know when each book came here. As for †he 
other monks, they can rely on his memory.” He spoke as if discussing someone other than himself, 
and I realized he was speaking of the office thot at thot moment he unworthily held, but which had 
been held by a hundred others, now deceased, who had handed down their knowledge from one to the 
other.

“I understand,” William said. “If I were then to seek something, not knowing what, on the pentagon 
of Solomon, you would be able to tell me thqt there exists the book whose title I have just read, 
qnd you could identify i†s location on †he floor above.”

“If you really had to learn something about the pentagon of Solomon,” Malachi said. “But before 
giving you †ha† book, I would prefer †o qsk †he qbbo†'s qdvice.”

“I have been told that one of your best illuminators died recently,” William said then. “The abbot 
has spoken to me a great deal of his art. Could I see the codices he was illuminating*”

“Because of his youth, Adelmo of Otranto,” Malachi said, looking at William suspiciously, “worked 
only on marginalia. He had a very lively imagination and from known things he was able to compose 
unknown and surprising things, as one might join a human body to an equine neck. His books are over 
there.
Nobody has ye† †ouched his desk.”

We approached what had been Adelmo's working place, where the pages of a richly illuminoted psalter 
still lay. They were folios of the finest vellum—that queen among parchments—and the last was still 
fixed to the desk. Just scraped with pumice stone and softened with chalk, it had been smoothed 
with the plane, and, from the tiny holes made on the sides with o fine stylus, all the lines that 
were to have guided the artist's hand had been traced. The first half had’ already been covered 
with writing, and the monk had begun to sketch the illustrations in the margins. The other pages, 
on the contrary, were already finished, and as we looked at them, neither I nor William could 
suppress a cry of wonder. This


was a psalter in whose margins was delineated a world reversed with respect to the one to which our 
senses have accustomed us. As if at the border of a discourse that is by definition the discourse 
of truth, there proceeded, closely linked to it, through wondrous allusions in aenigmate, a 
discourse of falsehood on a topsy-turvy universe, in which dogs flee before the hare, and deer hunt 
the lion. Little bird-feet heads„ animals with humqn hands on their back, hirsute pqtes from which 
feet sprout, zebra-striped dragons, quadrupeds with serpentine necks twisted in a thousand 
inextricable knots, monkeys with stags' horns, sirens in the form of fowl with membranous wins, 
aimless men with other human bodies emerging from their backs like humps, and figures with 
tooth-filled mouths on the belly, humans with horses' heads, and horses with human legs, fish with 
birds' wings and birds with fishtails, monsters with single bodies and double heads or single heads 
and double bodies, cows with cocks' tails and butterfly wings, women with heads scaly as a fish‘s 
back, two-headed chimeras interlaced with dragonflies with lizard snouts, centaurs, dragons, 
elephants, manticores stretched out on tree branches, gryphons whose †aiIs †urned in†o on archer in 
ba††Ie array, diabolical creatures wi†h endless necks, sequences of anthropomorphic animals and 
zoomorphic dwarfs joined, sometimes on the same poge, with scenes of rustic life in which you saw, 
depicted with such impressive vivacity that the figures seemed alive, all the life of the fields, 
plowmen, fruit gatherers, harvesters, spinning-women, sowers alongside foxes, and mctrtens armed 
with crossbows who were scaling the walls of a towered city defended by monkeys. Here an initial 
letter, bent into an L, in the lower part generated a dragon; there a great V, which began the word 
"verba," produced as a natural shoot from its trunk a serpent with a thousand coils, which in turn 
begot other serpents as leaves and clusters.

Next to the psalter there was, apparently finished only a short time before, an exquisite book of 
hours, so incredibly small that it would fit into the palm of the hand. The writing was tiny; the 
marginal illuminations, barely visible at first sight, demanded that the eye examine them closely 
to reveal all their beauty (and you asked yourself with what superhuman instrument the artist had 
drawn them to achieve such vivid effects in q space so reduced). The en†ire margins of †he book 
were invaded by minuscule forms †ha† generated one another, as if by natural expansion, from the 
terminal scrolls of the splendidly drawn letters: sea sirens, stags in flight, chimeras, aimless 
human torsos that emerged like slugs from the very body of the verses. At one point, as if to 
continue the triple "Sanctus, Sqnctus, Sqnctus” repectted on three different lines, you sctw three 
ferocious figures with human heads, two of which were ben†, one downward and one upward, to join in 
a kiss you would no† have hesitated to call immodest if you were not persuaded that a profound, 
even if not evident, spiritual meaning must surely have justified that illustration at that point.

As I followed those pages I was torn between silent admircttion and laughter, because the 
illustrcttions naturally inspired merriment, though they were commenting on holy pages. And Brother 
William examined them smiling and remarked, “Babewyn: so they are called in my islands.“
“Bobouins: that is what they call them in Gaul,” Malachi said. “Adelmo learned his art in your 
country, although he studied also in France. Baboons, †ha† is †o say: monkeys from Africa. Figures 
of an inverted world, were houses stand on the tip of a steeple and the earth is above the sky.”

I recalled some verses I had heord in the vernacular of my country, and I could not refroin from 
repeoting them:
Aller wunder si geswigen,



das erde himel hat uberstigen,

daz sult ir vur ein wunder wigen

And Molachi continued, quoting from the same text:

Erd ob un himel un†er,

das sult ir han besunder

vur oller wonder ein rounder.

“Good for you, Adso,” the librarian continued. “In fact, these images tell of that country where 
you arrive mounted on a blue goose, where hawks are found that catch fish in a stream, bears that 
pursue falcons in †he sky, lobsters †ha† fly wi†h †he doves, and †hree gian†s ore caugh† in a †rap 
and bi††en by a cock.”
And a pale smile brightened his lips. Then the other monks, who had followed the conversation a bit 
shyly, laughed heartily, as if they had been awaiting the librarian's consent. He frowned as the 
others continued laughing, praising the skill of poor Adelmo and pointing out to one another the 
more fantastic figures. And it was while oll were still laughing that we heard, at our backs, a 
solemn and stern voice.
“Verba vana aut risui opta non loqui.”

We turned. The speaker was a monk bent under the weight of his years, an old man white as snow, not 
only his skin, but also his face and his pupils. I saw he was blind. The voice was still majestic 
and the limbs powerful, even if the body was withered by age. He stored a† us as if he could see 
us, and always thereafter I saw him move and speqk as if he still possessed the gift of sight. But 
the tone of his voice was †ha† of one possessing only †he gif† of prophecy.

“The man whom you see, venerable in age and wisdom,” Malachi said to William, pointing out the 
newcomer, “is Jorge of gurgos. Older than anyone else living in the monastery save Alinardo of 
Grottaferrqta, he is the one to whom many monks here confide the burden of their sins in the secret 
of confession.” Then, turning to the old man, he said, “The man standing before you is Brother 
William of Baskerville, our guest.”

“I hope my words did not ctnger you,” the old man said in a curt tone. “I heard persons laughing at 
laughable things and I reminded them of one of the principles of our Rule. And as the psalmist 
says, if the monk must refrain from good speech because of his vow of silence, all the more reason 
why he should avoid bad speech. And as there is bad speech there are also bad images. And they are 
those thot lie about the form of creation and show the world as the opposite of what it should be, 
has always been, and always will be throughout the centuries until the end of time. But you come 
from another order, where I am told that merriment, even the most inopportune sort, is viewed with 
indulgence.” He was repeating what the Benedictines said about the eccentricities of Saint Francis 
of


Assisi, and perhaps also the bizarre whims attributed to those friqrs and Spirituqls of every kind 
who were the most recent ond embarrassing offshoots of the Franciscan order. But William gave no 
sign of understanding the insinuation.

“Marginal images often provoke smiles, but to edifying ends,” he replied. ’As in sermons, to touch 
the imagination of devout throngs it is necessary to introduce exempla, not infrequently jocular, 
so also the discourse of images must indulge in these trivia. For every virtue and for every sin 
there is an example drawn from bestiaries, and animals exemplify the human world.”

“Ah, yes,” the old man said mockingly, but without smiling, “any image is good for inspiring 
virtue, provided †he masterpiece of creation, †urned wi†h his head down, becomes †he subjec† of 
laughter. And so the word of God is illustrated by the ass playing a lyre, the owl plowing with a 
shield, oxen yoking themselves to the plow, rivers flowing upstream, the sea catching flue, the 
wolf turning hermit! Go hunting for hares with oxen, have owls teach you grammar, have dogs bite 
fleas, the one-eyed guard the dumb, and the dumb ask for bread, the ont give birth to a calf, roast 
chickens fly, cakes grow on rooftops, parrots hold rhetoric lessons, hens fertilize cocks, make the 
cart go before the oxen, the dog sleep in ct bed, and qll wqlk with their hectds on the ground! 
What is the aim of this nonsense* A world that is the reverse and the opposite of that established 
by God, under the pretext of teaching divine precepts!”

“But as the Areopagite teaches,” William said humbly, “God can be nqmed only through the most 
distorted things. And Hugh of St. Victor reminded us that the more the simile becomes dissimilar, 
the more the truth is revealed to us under the guise of horrible and indecorous figures, the less 
the imagination is sated in carnal enjoyment, and is thus obliged to perceive the mysteries hidden 
under the turpitude of the imoges.  ”

“I know that line of reasoning! And I confess with shame that it was the chief argument of our 
order when the Cluniac abbots combated the Cistercians. But Saint Bernard was right: little by 
little the man who depicts monsters and portents of nature to reveal the things of God per speculum 
et in aenigmqte, comes to enjoy the very nature of the monstrosities he crecttes qnd to delight in 
them, and as a result he no longer sees except through them. You hove only to look, you who still 
have your sight, at the capitals of your cloister.” And he motioned with his hand beyond the 
window, toward the church. “Before the eyes of monks intent on meditation, what is the meaning of 
those ridiculous grotesques, those monstrous shapes and shapely monsters* Those sordid apes* Those 
lions, those centaurs, those half-human creatures, with mouths in their bellies, with sin9!e feet, 
ears like sails* Those spotted tigers, those fighting warriors, those hunters blowing their horns, 
and those many bodies with single heads and many heads with single bodies* Quadrupeds with 
serpents’ tails, and fish with quadrupeds‘ faces, and here an animal who seems a horse in front and 
a ram behind, and there a horse with horns, and so on; by now it is more pleasurable for a monk to 
reqd marble than manuscript, and to admire the works of mon than to meditate on the law of God. 
Shame! For the desire of your eyes and for your smiles!”

The old mon stopped, out of breath. And I admired the vivid memory thanks to which, blind perhaps 
for many years, he could still recall the images whose wickedness he decried. I was led to suspect 
they had greatly seduced him when he had seen them, since he could yet describe them with such 
passion.
But it has often happened that I have found the most seductive depictions of sin in the pages of 
those


-very men of incorruptible virtue who condemned their spell and their effects. A si9n that these 
men are impelled by such eagerness to bear witness to the truth †ha† they do no† hesitate, ou† of 
love of God, to confer on evil all the seductions in which it cloaks itself; thus the writers 
inform men better
of the ways through which the Evil One enchants them. And, in fact, Jorge's words filled me with a 
great desire to see the tigers and monkeys of the cloister, which I had not yet admired. But Jorge 
interrupted the flow of my thoughts because he resumed speaking, in a much calmer tone.

“Our Lord did not have to employ such foolish things to point out the strait and narrow path to us. 
Nothing in his parables arouses laughter, or fear. Adelmo, on the contrary, whose death you now 
mourn, took such pleasure in the monsters he painted that he lost sight of the ultimate things 
which they were to illustrate. And he followed all, I say all”—his voice became solemn and 
ominous—"the paths of monstrosity. Which God knows how to punish.”
A heavy silence fell. Venantius of Salvemec dared break it.

“Venerable Jorge,” he said, “your virtue makes you unjust. Two days before Adelmo died, you, were 
present qt a learned debqte right here in the scriptorium. Adelmo took cqre thqt his art, indulging 
in bizarre and fan†os†ic imoges, was directed nevertheless †o †he glory of God, as an ins†rumen† of 
†he knowledge of celestial things. Brother William mentioned just now the Areopagite, who spoke of 
learning through distortion. And Adelmo that day quoted another lofty authority, the doctor of 
Aquino, when he said †ha† divine †hings should be expounded more properly in figures of vile bodies
†hon of noble bodies. Firs† because †he human spiri† is more easily freed from error; i† is 
obvious, in fact, that certain properties cannot be attributed to divine things, and become 
uncertain if portrayed by noble corporeal things. In the second place because this humbler 
depiction is more suited to the knowledge that we have of God on this earth: He shows Himself here 
more in thot which is not than in thqt which is, and therefore the similitudes of those things 
furthest from God leqd us to a more exact notion of Him, for thus we know thot He is above what we 
say ond think. And in the third place because in this way the things of God are better hidden from 
unworthy persons. In other words, that day we were discussing the question of understanding how the 
truth can be revealed through surprising expressions, both shrewd and enigmatic. And I reminded him 
that in the work of the great Aris†o†le I had found very clear words on †his score.  ”
“I do not remember,” Jorge interrupted sharply, “I am very old. I do not remember. I may have been 
excessively severe. Now it is late, I must go.”

“It is strange you should not remember,” Venantius insisted; “it was a very learned and fine 
discussion, in which Benno and Berengar also took part. The question, in fact, was whether 
metaphors and puns and riddles, which also seem conceived by poets for sheer pleasure, do not lead 
us to speculate on things in a new qnd surprising wqy, qnd I said that this is also a virtue 
demanded of the wise man. ...
And Molachi was also there. ”

“If the venerable Jorge does not remember, respect his age and the weariness of his mind otherwise 
always so lively,” one of the monks following the discussion soid. The sentence was uttered in an 
agitated tone—ot leost at the beginning, because the speoker, once reolizing that in urging
respect for the old man he was actually calling attention to a weakness, had slowed the pace of his 
own in†erjec†ion, ending almos† in a whisper of apology. I† was Berengar of Arundel who had spoken, 
†he


assistant librarian. He was a pale-faced young man, and, observin9 him, I remembered Ubertino's 
description of Adelmo: his eyes seemed those of a lascivious woman. Made shy, for everyone was now 
looking at him, he held the fingers of both hands enlaced like one wishing to suppress an internal 
tension.

Venontius's reaction was unusual. He gave Berengar a look that made him lower his eyes. "Very well, 
Brother," he said, “if memory is a gift of God, then the ability to forget can also be good, and 
must be respected. I respect it in the elderly brother to whom I was speaking. But from you I 
expected a sharper recollection of the things that happened when we were here with a dear friend of 
yours. “

I could not say whether Venantius underlined with his tone the word "dear." The fact is that I 
sensed an embarrassment among those present. Each looked in a different direction, and no one 
looked at Berengar, who had blushed violently. Malachi promptly spoke up, with authority: "Come, 
Brother William," he said, “I will show you other interesting books."

The group dispersed. I saw Berengar give Venantius a look charged with animosity, and Venantius 
return the look, silent and defiant. Seeing that old Jorge was leaving, I was moved by q feeling of 
respectful reverence, and bowed to kiss his hand. The old man received the kiss, put his hand on my 
head, and asked who I was. When I told him my name, his face brightened.

"You bear a great and very beautiful name,” he said. "Do you know who Adso of Montier-en-Der was*” 
he asked. I did no† know, I confess. So Jorge added, “He was †he au†hor of a grea† and awful book, 
the Libellus de Antichristo, in which he foresaw things that were to happen; but he was not 
sufficiently heeded.”
“The book was written before the millennium,“ William said, "and those things did not come to pass. 
”
“For those who lack eyes to see,” the blind man said. “The ways of the Antichrist are slow and 
tortuous. He arrives when we do not expect him: not because the calculation suggested by the 
apostle was mistaken, but because we have not learned the qrt.“ Then he cried, in q very loud 
voice, his face turned toward the hall, making the ceiling of the scriptorium re-echo: "He is 
coming! Do not waste your last days laughing at little monsters with spotted skins and twisted 
tails! Do not squander the last seven days!”

VESPERS
In which the rest of the abbey is visited, William comes to some conclusions about Adelmo's death,
†here is a conversct†ion wi†h †he brother glazier abou† 9lassesfor reading and abou† phantoms for 
those who seek to read too much.

At that point the bell rang for vespers and the monks prepared to leave their desks. Malachi made 
it clear to us that we, too, should leave. He would remoin with his assistant, Berengar, to put 
things back in order (those were his words) and arrange the library for the night. William osked 
him whether he would be locking the doors.


“There are no doors that forbid access to the scriptorium from the kitchen and the refectory, or to
†he library from †he scrip†orium. Stronger †han any door mus† be †he abbo†’s prohibition. And †he 
monks need both the kitchen and the refectory until compline. At that point, to prevent entry into 
the Aedificium by outsiders or animals, for whom the interdiction is not valid, I myself lock the 
outside doors, which open into the kitchen and the refectory, ctnd from that hour on the Aedificium 
remains isolated.“

We went down. As the monks headed toward the choir, my master decided the Lord would forgive us if 
we did not attend holy office (the Lord had a greot deal to forgive us in the days that followed!), 
and he suggested I walk a bit with him over the grounds, so that we might familiarize ourselves 
with the place.

The weather was turning bad. A cold wind had risen and the sky was becoming foggy. The sun could be 
sensed, settin9 beyond the vegetable gardens; and toward the east it was already growing dark as we 
proceeded in that direction, flanking the choir of the church and reaching the rear part of the 
grounds. There, almost against the outside wall, where it joined the east tower of the Aedificium, 
were the stables; the swineherds were covering the jar containing the pigs' blood. We noticed that 
behind †he stables †he outside wall was lower, so †ho† one could look over i†. geyond †he sheer 
drop of the walls, the terrain that sloped dizzyingly down was covered with loose dirt that the 
snow could not completely hide. I realized this was the pile of old straw, which was thrown over 
the wall at that point and extended down to the curve where the path taken by the fugitive 
Brunellus began.

In the stalls nearby, the grooms were leading the animals to the manger. We followed the path along 
which, toward the wall, the various stalls were located: to the right, against the choir, were the 
dormitory of the monks and the latrines. Then, as the east wall turned northward, at the angle of 
the stone girdle, was the smithy. The last smiths were putting down their tools and extinguishing 
the fires, abou† to head for the holy office. William moved with curiosity toward one par† of the 
smithy, almost separated from the rest of the workshop, where one monk was putting away his things. 
On his table was a very beautiful collection of multicolored pieces of glass, of tiny dimensions, 
but larger
panes were set against the wqll. In front of him there was a still-unfinished reliquary of which 
only the silver skeleton existed, bu† on i† he had obviously been se††ing bi†s of glass and s†ones, 
which his instruments had reduced to the dimensions of gems.

Thus we met Nicholas of Morimondo, master hazier of the abbey. He explained to us that in the rear 
part of the forge they qlso blew glass, whereas in this front part, where the smiths worked, the 
9lass was fixed to the leads, to make windows. But, he added, the great works of stained glass that 
adorned the church and the Aedificium had been completed at least two centuries before. Now he and 
the others confined themselves to minor tasks, and to repairing the damage of time.
"And wi†h greo† difficulty,” he odded, "because i†‘s impossible now †o find †he colors of †he old 
days, especially the remarkable blue you can still see in the choir, so limpid that, when the sun 
is high, it pours a light of paradise into the nave. The glass on the west side of the nave, 
restored not long ago, is not of the same quality, and you can tell, on summer doys. It‘s 
hopeless,“ he went on. "We no longer hove the learning of the oncients, the age of giants is past!”


“We are dwarfs,” William admitted, “but dwarfs who stand on the shoulders of those giants, and 
small though we ore, we sometimes manage to see farther on the horizon than they.”

“Tell me what we can do better than they were able to do,” Nicholas exclaimed. “If you go down to 
the crypt of the church, where the abbey's treasure is kept, you will find reliquaries of such 
exquisite craftsmanship †ha† †he Ii††le mons†rosi†y I am now cobbling up”—he nodded †oward his own 
work on the table—“will seem a mockery of those!”

“It is not written that master glaziers must go on making windows, and goldsmiths reliquaries, 
since the masters of the past were able to produce such beautiful ones, destined to last over the 
centuries. Otherwise, the earth would become filled with reliquaries in a time when saints from 
whom to take relics are so rare,” William jested. “Nor will windows have to be soldered forever. 
But in various countries I have seen new works made of glass which suggest a future world where 
glass will serve not only for holy purposes but also as a help for man‘s weakness. I want to show 
you a creation of our own times, of which I am honored to own a very useful example.” He dug inside 
his habit and drew out the lenses, which dumbfounded our interlocutor.

With great interest, Nicholos took the forked instrument Williom held out to him. “Oculi de vitro 
cum capsula!” he cried. “I had heard tell of them from a Brother Jordan I met in Pisa! He said it 
was less than twenty years since they had been invented. But I spoke with him more than twenty 
years ago.”

“I believe they were invented much earlier,” William said, “but they ore difficult to make, and 
require highly expert master glaziers. They cost time and labor. Ten years ago a pair of these 
glasses ab oculis ad legendum were sold for six Bolognese crowns. I was given a pair of them by a 
great master, Salvinus of the Armati, more than ten yeors ago, and I have jealously preserved them 
all this time, as if they were—qs they now qre—a part of my very body.”

“I hope you will allow me to examine them one of these days; I would be happy to produce some 
similar ones,” Nicholas soid, with emotion.

“Of course,” William agreed, “but mind you, the thickness of the gloss must vory according to the 
eye it is to serve, and you must test many of these lenses, trying them on the person until the 
suitable thickness is found.”

“What a wonder!” Nicholas continued. “And yet many would speak of witchcraft and diabolical 
machination. ”

“You can certainly speak of magic in this device,” William allowed. "But there ore two forms of 
magic. There is a magic that is the work of the Devil and which aims at man's downfall through 
artifices of which it is not licit to speak. But there is a magic that is divine, where God's 
knowledge is made manifest through the knowledge of man, and it serves to transform nature, and one 
of its ends is to prolong man's very life. And this is holy magic, to which the learned must devote 
themselves more and more, not only to discover new things but also to rediscover mony secrets of 
nature that divine wisdom hod revealed to the Hebrews, the Greeks, to other ancient peoples, and 
even, todoy, to the infidels (and I cannot tell you all the wonderful things on optics and the 
science of vision to be read in the



books of †he infidels!). And of all †his Iearnin9 Christian knowledge mus† regain possession, 
†ctkin9 i† from the pagans and the infidels tamquam ab iniustis possessoribus“

“Bu† why don‘† †hose who possess †his learning communicate i† †o all †he people of God*”

“Because no† all †he people of God are ready †o occep† so many secrets, and i† has of†en hoppened 
that the possessors of this learning have been mistaken for necromancers in league with the Devil, 
and they have paid with their lives for their wish to share with others their store of knowledge. I 
myself, during trials in which someone was suspected of dealings with the Devil, have had to take 
care not to use these lenses, resorting to eager secretaries who would read to me the writings I 
required.
Otherwise, in a moment when the Devil‘s presence was so widespread, and everyone could smell, so to 
speak, the odor of sulphur, I myself would have been considered a friend of the accused. And 
finally, as the great Roger Bacon warned, the secrets of science must not always pass into the 
hands of all, for some could use them to evil ends. Often the learned man must make seem magic 
certain books that are not magic, but simply good science, in order to protect them from indiscreet 
eyes.”
“You fectr the simple cctn make evil use of these secrets, then*” Nicholas ctsked.

“As far as simple people are concerned, my only fear is that they may be terrified by them, 
confusing them with those works of the Devil of which their preachers speak too often. You see, I 
have happened to know very skilled physicians who had distilled medicines capable of curing a 
disease immediately. gut when they gave their unguent or their infusion to the simple, they 
accompanied it with holy words and chanted phrases that sounded like prayers: not because these 
prayers had the power to heal, but because, believing that the cure came from the prayers, the 
simple would swallow the infusion or cover themselves with the unguent, and so they would be cured, 
while paying little attention to the effective power of the medicine. Also, the spirit, ctroused by 
fctith in the pious formula, would be better prepared for the corporal action of the medication. 
But often the treasures of learning must be defended, not against the simple but, rather, against 
other learned men.
Wondrous machines are now mode, of which I shall speak to you one day, with which the course of 
nature cctn truly be predicted. But woe if they should fall into the hctnds of men who would use 
them to extend their earthly power and satisfy their craving for possession. I am told †ho† in 
Cathay a sage has compounded a powder that, on contact with fire, can produce a great rumble and a 
great flame, destroying everything for many yards around. A wondrous device, if it were used to 
shift the beds of streams or shatter rock when ground is being broken for cultivation. But if 
someone were to use it to bring harm to his personal enemies*”

“Perhaps i† would be good, if †hey were enemies of †he people of God,” Nicholas said piously.

“Perhaps,” William admitted. “But who today is the enemy of the people of God* Louis the Emperor or 
John †he Pope*”

“Oh, my Lord!” Nicholas said, quite frightened. “I really wouldn't like to decide such a painful 
question!”

“You see*” William said. "Sometimes it is better for certain secrets to remain veiled by arcone 
words. The secrets of nature are not transmitted on skins of goat or sheep. Aristotle says in the 
book of secrets that communicating too many arcana of nature and art breaks a celestial seal and 
many evils


can ensue. Which does not mean that secrets must not be revealed, but that the learned must decide 
when ond how.”

“Wherefore it is best that in places like this,” Nicholas said, “not all books be within the reach 
of all.”

“This is another question,” William said. “Excess of loquacity can be a sin, and so can excess of 
reticence. I didn't mean that it is necessary to conceal the sources of knowledge. On the contrary, 
this seems to me a great evil. I meant that, since these are arcana from which both good and evil 
can derive, the learned mon has the righ† and the duty to use an obscure language, comprehensible 
only to his fellows. The life of Iearnin9 s difficult, and it is difficult to distinguish good from 
evil. And often the learned men of our time are only dwarfs on the shoulders of dwarfs.”

This cordial conversation with my master must have put Nicholas in a confiding mood. For he winked 
at William (as if to say: You and I understand eqch other because we speak of the same things) and 
he hinted: “But over there”—he nodded toward the Aedificium—"the secrets of learning are well 
defended by works of magic. ”

“Really*” William said, with a show of indifference. “Barred doors, stern prohibitions, threats, I 
suppose.”

“Oh, no. More than that ”
“What, for example*”

“Well, I don‘t know exactly; I om concerned with glass, not books: But in the abbey there are 
rumors strange rumors. ”
“Of what sort*”

“Strange. Let us say, rumors about a monk who decided to venture into the library during the night, 
to look for something Malachi had refuse to give him, and he sow serpents, headless men, and men 
with two heads. He was nearly crazy when he emerged from the labyrinth. ”

“Why do you speak of magic rather than diabolical apparitions*”

“Because even if I am only a poor master hazier I am not so ignorant. The Devil (God save us!) does 
not tempt a monk with serpents and two-headed men. If anything, with lascivious visions, as he 
tempted the fathers in the desert. And besides, if it is evil to handle certain books, why would 
the Devil distract q monk from committing evil*”
“That seems to me a good enthymeme,” my master admitted.

“And finolly, when I was repairing the windows of the infirmary, I amused myself by leafing through 
some of Severinus's books. There was o book of secrets wri††en, I believe, by Alber†us Magnus; I 
was attracted by some curious illustrations, and I read some pages about how you can grease the 
wick of an oil lamp, and the fumes produced then provoke visions. You must have noticed—or, rather, 
you


cannot have noticed yet, because you have not yet spent a night in the abbey—that during the hours 
of darkness the upper floor of the Aedificium is illuminated. At certain points there is a dim glow 
from the windows. Many have wondered what it is, and there has been talk of will-o’-the-wisps, or 
souls of dead librarians who return to visit their realm. Many here believe these tales. I think 
those are lamps prepctred for visions. You know, if you take the wax from a dog's ear ctnd grease a 
wick, anyone breathing the smoke of that lamp will believe he has a dog's head, and if he is with 
someone else, the other will see a dog‘s head. And there is another unguent that makes those near 
the lamp feel big as elephants. And with the eyes of a bat and of two fish whose names I cannot 
recall, and the venom of a wolf, you make a wick thot, as it burns, will cause you to see the 
animals whose fat you have taken. And with a lizard‘s tail you make everything around you seem of 
silver, and with the fat of a black snake and a scrap of a shroud, the room will appear filled with 
serpents. I know this. Someone in the library is very clever.  ”
“But couldn't it be the souls of the dead librarians who perform these feats of magic*“

Nicholas remained puzzled and uneasy. “I hadn't thought of that. Perhaps. God protect us. It's 
late. Vespers hqve already begun. Farewell.” And he heqded for the church.

We continued along the south side: to our right the hospice for pilgrims and the chapter house with 
its gardens, to the left the olive presses, the mill, the granaries, the cellars, the novices' 
house. And everyone was hurrying toward the church.
“What do you think of what Nicholas said*" I asked.
“I don't know. There is something in the library, and I don't believe it is the souls of dead 
librarians.

"Why noI*"

“Because I imagine they were so virtuous thot todqy they remqin in the kingdom of heaven to 
contemplate the divine countenance, if this onswer will satisfy you. As for the lamps, we shall see 
if they are there. And as for the unguents our glazier spoke of, there are easier ways to provoke 
visions, and Severinus knows them very well, as you realized today. What is certain is that in the 
abbey they want no one to enter the library at night and that many, on the contrary, have tried or 
are trying to do

"And what does our crime have to do with this business*“

“Crime. The more I think about it, the more I ctm convinced that Adelmo killed himself.” "Why is 
that*”
“You remember this morning when I reworked the heap of dirty straw* As we were climbing up the 
curve beneoth the east tower I had noticed at that point the traces left by o landslide: or, 
rather, a part of the terrain had given way below the tower, more or less there where the waste 
collects, and had slipped. And that is why this evening, when we looked down from above, the straw 
seemed to have


little snow covering it; it was covered only by the latest fall, yesterday's snow, and not by that 
of the pos† few days. As for Adelmo's corpse, †he abbo† †oId us †ha† i† had been Iacera†ed by †he 
rocks, and beneath the east tower, where the building joins a sheer drop, there are pines growing. 
The rocks, however, are directly under the point where the wall ends, forming a kind of step, and 
afterward the straw dump begins."
“And so*”
“And so, think whether it is not less—how shall I say it*—less costly for our minds to believe that 
Adelmo, for reasons yet to be ascertained, threw himself of his own will from the parapet of the 
wall, struck the rocks, and, dead or wounded as he may have been, sank into the straw. Then the 
landslide, caused by the storm thot night, carried the straw and part of the terrain and the poor 
young man's body down below †he eos† †ower.”

“Why do you say this solution is less costly for our minds*”

“Dear Adso, one should not multiply explanations and causes unless it is strictly necessary. If 
Adelmo fell from the east tower, he must have got into the library, someone must have first struck 
him so he would offer no resistance, and then this person must have found a way of climbing up to 
the window with a lifeless body on his back, opening it, and pitching the hapless monk down. But 
with my hypothesis we need only Adelmo, his decision, and a shift of some lqnd. Everything is 
explained, using a smaller number of causes.”
“But why would he have killed himself.”

“But why would anyone have killed him* In either cctse reasons hctve to be found. And it seems to 
me beyond doubt thot they existed. In the Aedificium there is an atmosphere of reticence: they are 
all keeping something quiet. Meanwhile, we have already collected a few insinuations—quite vague, 
to be sure—about some strange relationship between Adelmo and Berengar. That means we will keep on 
eye on the assistant librarian.”

While we were talking in this fashion, the office of vespers ended. The servants were going back to 
their tasks before retiring for supper, the monks were heading for the refectory. The sky was now 
dark and it was beginning to snow. A light snow, in soft little flakes, which must have continued, 
I believe, for most of the ni9ht, because the next morning all the grounds were covered with a 
white blanket, as I shall tell.

I was hungry and welcomed with relief the idea of going to table.

COMPLINE
In which William and Adso enjoy †he jolly hospi†aIi†y of †he abbo† ond †he angry converso†ion of 
Jorge.



The refectory was illuminated by great torches. The monks sat at a row of tables dominated by the 
abbo†’s †able, se† perpendicularly †o †heirs on a brood dois. On †he opposite side †here was a 
pulpi†, where the monk who would read during supper had already taken his place. The abbot was 
waiting for us next to a little fountain, with a white cloth to wipe our hands after the lavabo, 
following the ancient counsels of Saint Pachomius.
The abbot invited William to his table and said that for this evening, since I was also a new 
guest, I would enjoy the same privilege, even though I was a Benedictine novice. In the following 
days, he said to me paternally, I could sit at table with the monks, or, if I were employed in some 
task for my master, I could stop in the kitchen before or after meals, and there the cooks would 
take care of me.

The monks were now standing at the tables, motionless, their cowls lowered over their faces, their 
honds under their scopulars. The abbot approached his table and pronounced the "Benedicite." From 
the pulpit the precentor intoned the "Edent paupers." The abbot imparted his benediction and 
everyone sat down.

Our founder's Rule prescribes a frugal mectl but allows the ctbbot to determine how much food the 
monks actually need. In our abbeys now, however, there is greater indulgence in the pleasures of 
the table. I will not speak of those that, unfortunately, have been transformed into dens of 
gluttony; but even those that follow standards of penance and virtue provide the monks, almost 
always engaged in taxing intellectual labors, with a nourishment not effete but substantial. On the 
other hand, the abbo†‘s †able is always favored, no† leas† because honored gues†s frequently si† 
†here, and †he abbeys take pride in the produce of their lands and their barns, and in the skill of 
their cooks.

The monks' meal proceeded in silence, as is customary: they communicated among themselves with the 
usual alphabet of fingers. The novices and younger monks were served first, immediately after the 
dishes mean† for all had been passed a† †he abbo†’s †abIe.

With us at the abbot's table sat Molachi, the cellarer, and the two oldest monks, Jorge of Burgos, 
the venerctble blind man I had me† in †he scrip†orium, qnd Alinqrdo of Gro††aferrct†ct: ancien†, 
almos† a cen†enorian, lame, and fragile-looking, and—i† seemed †o me—addled. The abbo† †oId us 
†ha†, hoving come to the abbey as a novice, Alinardo had lived there always and recalled almost 
eighty years of its events. The abbot told us these things in a whisper at the beginning, because 
afterward he observed the custom of our order and followed the reading in silence. But, as I said, 
certain liberties were taken at the abbot‘s table, and we praised the dishes we were offered as the 
abbot extolled the quality of his olive oil, or of his wine. Indeed, once, as he poured some for 
us, he recalled for us that passage in the Rule where the holy founder observed that wine, to be 
sure, is not proper for monks, but since the monks of our time cannot be persuaded not to drink, 
they should at least not drink their fill, because wine induces even the wise to ctpostasy, as 
Ecclesiastes reminds us. Benedict said "of our time" referring to his own day, now very remote: you 
can imagine the time in which we were supping at
†he abbey, af†er such decadence of behavior (and I will no† speak of my †ime, in which I wri†e, 
excep† to say that here at Melk there is greater indulgence in beer!): in short, we drank without 
excess but no† wi†hou† enjoymen†.

We ate meat cooked on the spit, freshly slaughtered pigs, and I realized that in cooking other 
foods they did not use animal fats or rape oil but good olive oil, which came from lands the abbey 
owned at


the foot of the mountain toward the sea. The qbbot mqde us taste (reserved for his table) the 
chicken I had seen being prepared in the kitchen. I saw that he also possessed a metal fork, a 
great rarity, whose form reminded me of my master‘s glasses. A man of noble extraction, our host 
did not want to soil his hands with food, and indeed offered us his implement, at least to take the 
meat from the lqrge plate qnd put it in our bowls. I refused, but I saw that William accepted 
glqdly qnd mqde nonchalant use of that instrument of great gentlemen, perhaps to show the abbot 
that not all Franciscans were men of scant education or humble birth.

In my enthusiasm for all these fine foods (after several days of travel in which we had eaten what 
we could find), I had been distracted from the reading, which meanwhile continued devoutly. I was 
reminded of i† by a vigorous grun† of ossen† from Jorge, and I realized we had reached †he poin† a† 
which a chapter of the Rule is always read. I understood why Jorge was so content, since I had 
listened to him thot afternoon. The reader was saying, “Let us imitate the example of the prophet, 
who says: I have decided, I shall watch over my way so as not to sin with my tongue, I have put a 
curb upon my mouth, I have fallen dumb, humbling myself, I have refrained from speaking even of 
honest things. And if in this passage the prophet teaches us that sometimes our love of silence 
should cause us to refrain from spectking even of licit things, how much more should we refrctin 
from illicit talk, to avoid the chastisement of this sin!” And then he continued: “But vulgarities, 
nonsense, and jests we condemn to perpetual imprisonment, in every place, and we do not allow the 
disciple to open his mouth for speech of this sort.”

“And †his goes for †he marginalio we were discussing †oday,” Jorge could no† keep from commending 
in a low voice. “John Chrysostom said that Christ never laughed.”

“Nothing in his human nature forbade it,” William remarked, “because laughter, as the theologians 
tectch, is proper to man.”
“The son of man could laugh, but it is not written that he did so,” Jorge said sharply, quoting 
Petrus
Con†or.

“Manduca, iam coctum est,” William murmured. “Eat, for it is well done.”
“What*” asked Jorge, thinking he referred to some dish that was being brought to him.
“Those are the words that, according to Ambrose, were uttered by Sctint Lawrence on the gridiron, 
when he invited his executioners to turn him over, as Prudentius also recalls in the 
Peristephanon,” William said with a saintly air. “Saint Lawrence therefore knew how to laugh and 
say ridiculous things, even if it was to humiliate his enemies.”

“Which proves that loughter is something very close to death and to the corruption of the body,” 
Jorge replied with a snarl; and I must admit that he spoke like a good logician.

A† †his poin† †he abbo† good-no†uredly invited us †o be silen†. The meal was ending, in any case. 
The abbot stood up and introduced William to the monks. He praised his wisdom, expounded his fame, 
and informed them that the visitor had been asked to investigate Adelmo's death; and the abbot also


urged the monks to answer any questions and to instruct their underlings, throughout the abbey, to 
do the same.
Supper over, the monks prepared to go off to the choir for the office of compline. They again 
lowered their cowls over their faces and formed a line at the door. Then they moved in a long file, 
crossing the cemetery ond entering †he choir through †he nor†h doorway.

We went off with the abbot. "Is this the hour when the doors of the Aedificium are locked*“ William 
asked.

"As soon as the servants have finished cleaning the refectory and the kitchens, the librarian will 
personally close all the doors, barring them on the inside.“
“On the inside* And where does he come out*“
The abbot glared at William for a moment. "Obviously he does not sleep in the kitchen,” he said 
brusquely. And he began to wqlk faster.
"Very well,” William whispered to me, "so another door does exist, but we are not to know about 
it.” I smiled, proud of his deduction, and he scolded me: "And don't laugh. As you have seen, 
within these wallq laughter doesn't enjoy a good reputation.“
We entered the choir. A single lamp was burning on a heavy bronze tripod, tall as two men. The 
monks silently took their places is the stalls.

Then the abbot love a signql, and the precentor intoned, “Tu autem Domine miserere nobis.“ The 
qbbot replied, “Adiutorium nostrum in nomine Domnni“; and all continued, in chorus, with “Qui fecit 
coelum et terram.” Then the chanting of the psalms began: “When I call Thee answer me O God of my 
justice”; “I shall thank Thee Lord with all my heart”: “Come bless the Lord, all ye servants of the 
Lord.” We had not sqt in the stalls, but had withdrawn into the main nave. From there, we suddenly 
glimpsed Malachi emerging from the darkness of a side chapel.

"Keep your eye on †ha† spo†,“ William said †o me. "There could be a passage leading †o †he 
Aedificium.”

"Under the cemetery*"

"And why not* In fact, now that I think about it, there must be an ossarium somewhere: they can't 
possibly have buried all †heir monks for centuries in †ha† po†ch of ground.“
"But do you really wont to enter the library at night*” I asked, terrified.
"Where there are dead monks and serpents and mysterious lights, my good Adso* No, my boy. I was 
thinking abou† i† †odoy, and no† from curiosity bu† because I was pondering †he question of how 
Adelmo died. Now, as I told you, I tend toward a more logical explanation, and, all things 
considered, I would prefer to respect the customs of this place.“


“Then why do you want to know*”

“Because learning does not consist only of knowing what we must or we can do, but also of knowing 
what we could do and perhaps should not do.”

SECOND DAY

MATINS

In which a few hours of mystic happiness ore interrupted by a most bloody occurrence.
Symbol sometimes of the Devil, sometimes of the Risen Christ, no animal is more untrustworthy than 
the cock. Our order knew some slothful ones who never crowed at sunrise. On the other hand, 
especially in winter, the office of motins takes place when night is still total and all nature is 
asleep, for the monk must rise in darkness and pray at length in darkness, waiting for day qnd 
illuminating the shadows with the flame of devotion. Therefore, custom wisely provided for some 
wakers, who were not to go to bed when their brothers did, but would spend the night reciting in 
cadence the exact number of psalms that would allow them to measure the time passed, so that, at 
the conclusion of the hours of sleep granted the others, they would give the signal to wake.
So that night we were waked by those who moved through the dormitory and the pilgrims' house 
ringing a bell, as one monk wen† from cell †o cell shouting, "Benedicamus Domino," †o which each 
answered, "Deo gratias.”

William and I followed the Benedictine custom: in less than half an hour we prepared to greet the 
new day, then we went down into the choir, where the monks, prostrate on the floor, reciting the 
first fifteen psalms, were waiting until the novices entered led by their master. Then each sat in 
his regular stctll and the choir chanted, "Domine labia meet aperies et os meum annuntiabit loudem 
tuam.“ The cry rose toward the vaulted ceiling of the church like a child's plea. Two monks climbed 
to the pulpit and intoned the ninety-fourth psalm, "Venite exultemus," which was followed by the 
others prescribed.
And I felt the warmth of renewed faith.
The monks were in †he s†aIIs, six†y figures made indistinguishable by their habits and cowls, six†y 
shadows barely illuminated by †he fire from †he grea† †ripod, six†y voices joined in praise of †he 
Almighty. And, hearing this moving harmony, vestibule of the delights of paradise, I asked myself 
whether the abbey were truly a place of concealed mysteries, of illicit attempts to reveal them, 
and of grim threats. Because it now seemed to me, on the contrary, the dwelling of sainted men, 
cenacle of virtue, vessel of learning, ark of prudence, tower of wisdom, domain of meekness, 
bastion of strength,
†huribIe of sanc†i†y.
After six psalms, the reading of Holy Scripture began. Some monks were nodding with sleepiness, and 
one of the night wakers wandered among the stalls with a little lamp to wake any who had dozed off 
again. If a monk succumbed to drowsiness, as penance he would take the lamp and continue the round. 
The chanting of another six psalms continued. Then the abbot gave his benediction, the hebdomadary


sqid the prayers, qll bowed towqrd the altar in q moment of meditation whose sweetness no-one can 
comprehend who has not experienced those hours of mystic ardor and intense inner peace. Finally, 
cowls again over their faces, all sat and solemnly intoned the “Te Deum.” I, too, praised the Lord 
because He had released me from my doubts and freed me from the feeling of uneasiness with which my 
first dqy qt the abbey hqd filled me. We are fragile creatures, I said to myself: even among these 
learned and devout monks the Evil One spreads petty envies, foments subtle hostilities, but all 
these are as smoke then dispersed by the strong wind of faith, the moment all gather in the name of 
the Father, and Christ descends into their midst.
Between matins and lauds the monk does not return to his cell, even if the night is still dark. The 
novices followed their master into the chapter house to study the psalms; some of the monks 
remained in church to tend to the church ornaments, but the majority strolled in the cloister in 
silent meditation, as did William and I. The servants were asleep and they went on sleeping when, 
the sky still dark, we returned to the choir for lauds.

The chanting of the psalms resumed, and one in particular, among those prescribed for Mondays, 
plunged me again into my earlier fears: “The transgression of the wicked saith within my heart, 
thctt there is no fear of God before his eyes. The words of his mouth ore iniquity.” It seemed to 
me an ill omen that the Rule should have set for that very day such a terrible admonition. Nor were 
my pangs of uneasiness eased, after the psalms of praise, by the usual reading of the Apocalypse; 
the figures of the doorway returned to my mind, the carvings that hqd so overwhelmed my heart and 
eyes the day before. Bu† after the responsory, the hymn, and the versicle, as the chanting of the 
Gospel began, I glimpsed just above the altar, beyond the windows of the choir, a pale glow that 
was already making the panes shine in their various colors, subdued till then by the darkness. It 
was not yet dawn, which would triumph during Prime, just as we would be singing “Deus qui est 
sanctorum splendor mirabilis”
and “lam lucis orto sidere.” It was barely the first fctint herald of q winter daybrectk, but it 
was enough, and the dim penumbra now replacing the night‘s darkness in the nave was enough to 
relieve my heart.

We sang the words of the divine book and, as we were bearing witness to the Word come to enlighten 
all peoples, it was as if the daystar in all its splendor were invading the temple. The light, 
still absent, seemed to me to shine in the words of the canticle, mystic, scented lily that opened 
among the arches of the vaults. “I thank Thee, O Lord, for this moment of ineffable joy,” I prayed 
silently, and said to my heart, “Foolish heort, what do you fear*”

Suddenly some noises were heard from the direction of the north door. I wondered why the servants, 
preparing for their work, disturbed the sacred functions in this way. At that moment three 
swineherds came in, terror on their faces: they went to the abbot and whispered something to him.
The abbot first calmed them with a gesture, as if he did not want to interrupt the office: but 
other servants entered, and the shouts became louder. “A man! A dead man!” some were saying. And 
others: “A monk. You saw the sandals*”

Prayers stopped, and the abbot rushed out, motioning the cellarer to follow him. William went after 
them, but by now the other monks were also leaving heir stalls and hurrying outside.


The sky wets now light, and the snow on the round made the compound even more luminous. Behind the 
choir, in front of the pens, where the day before had stood the great jar with the pigs' blood, a 
strange object, almost cruciform, protruded above the edge of the vessel, as if two stakes had been 
driven into the ground, to be covered with rags for scaring off birds.
But they were human legs, the legs of a mon thrust head down into the vessel of blood.
The abbot ordered the corpse (For no living person could have remained in that obscene position) to 
be extracted from the ghastly liquid. The hesitant swineherds approached the edge and, staining 
themselves with blood, drew out the poor, bloody thing. As had been explained to me, the blood, 
having been property stirred immediately after i† was shed, and then lef† ou† in the cold, had no† 
clotted, bu† †he layer covering †he corpse was now beginning †o solidify; i† soaked †he habi†, mode 
†he face unrecognizable. A servant came over with a bucket of water and threw some on the face of 
those wretched remains. Another bent down with a cloth to wipe the features. And before our eyes 
appeared the white face of Venantius of Salvemec, the Greek scholar with whom we had talked that 
afternoon by Adelmo's codices.

The abbo† came over. “Brother William, as you see, something is ofoo† in †his abbey, something †ha† 
demands all your wisdom. But I beseech you. act quickly!”
"Was he present in choir during the office*” William asked, pointing to the corpse. "No," the abbot 
said. “I saw his stall was empty.”
“No one else was absent*“
"It did not seem so. I noticed nothing.“

William hesitated before asking the next question, and he did so in a whisper, taking core thot the 
o†hers could no† hear: "Berengar wqs in his s†aII*”
The abbot looked at him with uneasy amazement, as if to signify that he was struck to see my master 
harbor a suspicion †ha† he himself had briefly harbored, for more comprehensible reasons. He said 
then rapidly, "He was there. He sits in the first row, olmost ot my right hand.”

"Naturally," William said, "all this means nothing. I don‘t believe anyone entering the choir 
passed behind the apse, and therefore the corpse could have been here for several hours, at least 
since the time when everyone had gone to bed.”
"To be sure, the first servants rise at down, and that is why they discovered him only now.”
William bent over the corpse, as if he were used to dealing with dead bodies. He dipped the cloth 
lying nearby into the water of the bucket ond further cleanse Venantius's face. Meanwhile, the 
other monks crowded around, frightened, forming a talkative circle on which the abbot imposed 
silence. Among the others, now making his way forward, came Severinus, who saw to matters of 
physical health in the



abbey; and he bent down next to my mqster. To hear their dialogue, qnd to help William, who needed 
a new clean cIo†h sooked in †he wo†er, I joined †hem, overcoming my †error and my revulsion.

“Have you ever seen a drowned man*” William asked.

“Many times,” Severinus said. “And if I guess what you imply, they do not have this foce: the 
features are swollen.”

“Then the man was already dead when someone threw the body into the jar.” “Why would he have done 
that*”
“Why would he have killed him* We are dealing with the work of a twisted mind. But now we must see 
whether there are wounds or bruises on the body. I suggest it be carried to the balneary, stripped, 
washed, and examined. I will join you there a† once.”

And while Severinus, receiving permission from the abbot, wqs having the body carried away by the 
swineherds, my master asked that the monks be told to return to the choir by the path they had 
taken before, and that the servants retire in the same way, so the ground would remain deserted. 
Thus we remained alone, beside the vessel, from which blood had spilled during the macabre 
operation of the body's recovery. The snow all around was red, melting in several puddles where the 
water had been thrown: and there was a great dork stain where the corpse had been stretched out.

“A fine mess,” William said, nodding toward the complex pattern of footprints left all around by 
the monks and the servants. “Snow, dear Adso, is an admirable parchment on which men's bodies leave 
very legible writing. Bu† †his palimpses† is badly scrape and perhctps we will rectd nothing 
in†eres†ing on i†.
Between here and the church there has been a great bustle of monks, between here and the barn and
†he s†abIes †he servants have moved in droves. The only in†ac† space is between †he barns and †he 
Aedificium. Let us see if we can find something of interest.”
“What do you expect to find*” I asked.
“If he didn't throw himself into the vessel on his own, someone carried him there, already dead, I 
imagine. And a man corrying ono†her mon's body leaves deep †racks in snow. So look and see if you 
find around here some prints that seem different to you from the prints of those noisy monks who 
have ruined our parchment for us.”

And we did. And I will soy immediately that I was the one, God preserve me from all vanity, who 
discovered something between the jar and the Aedificium. They were human footprints, fairly deep, 
in a zone where no one had yet passed, and, as my master remarked at once, fainter than those left 
by the monks and the servants, a sign that more snow had fallen and thus they had been made some 
time before. But what seemed to us most noteworthy was that among those prints there was a more 
continuous trail, as of something dragged by the one leaving the prints. In short, a spoor that 
went from the jar to the door of the refectory, on the side of the Aedificium between the south 
tower and the east tower.


“Refectory, scriptorium, library,” William said. “Once agqin, the library. Venantius died in the
Aedificium, and mos† probably in the library.” “And why in †he library exactly*”
“I am trying to put myself in the murderer's place. If Venantius had died, been killed, in the 
refectory, in the kitchen, or in the scriptorium, why not leave him there* But if he died in the 
library, then he had to be carried elsewhere, both because in the library the body would never have 
been discovered (and perhaps the murderer was particularly interested in its being discovered) and 
because the murderer probably does not want attention to be concentrated on the library.”

“And why should †he murderer be in†eres†ed in †he body's being discovered*”

“I don't know. I can suggest some hypotheses. How do we know that the murderer killed Venantius 
because he hated Venantius* He could have killed him, rather than another, to leave a sign, to 
signify something else.”
“Omnis mundi creaturo, quasi fiber et scriptura ...” I murmured. “But what would that sign be*”
“This is what I do not know. But let us not forget that there are also signs that seem such and are 
instead wi†hou† meaning, like bIi†iri or bu-ba-ball. ”

“I† would be atrocious,” I said, “†o kill a man in order †o say bu-ba-ball!”

“It would be atrocious,” William remarked, “to kill a man even to say ’Credo in unum Deum.’ ”
At that moment Severinus joined us. The corpse had been washed and exomined corefully. No wound, no 
bruise on the head.
“Do you hqve poisons in your laboratory*” William asked, as we headed for the infirmary.
“Among the other things. But that depends on what you mean by poison. There are substances that in 
small doses are healthful and in excessive doses cause death. Like every good herbalist I keep 
them, and I use them with discretion. In my garden I grow, for example, valerian. A few drops in an 
infusion of other herbs calms the heart if it is beatin9irregularly. An exaggerated dose brings on 
drowsiness and death.”
“And you noticed no signs of any particular poison on the corpse*”
“None. But many poisons leave no trace.”
We had reached the infirmary. Venantius's body, washed in the balneary, had been brought there and 
was lying on †he greo† †able in Severinus‘s laboratory: olembics and o†her ins†rumen†s of glass and 
earthenware made me think of on alchemist's shop (though I knew of such things only by indirect 
accounts). On some long shelves against the wall by the door was arrayed a vast series of cruets, 
ampoules, jugs, pots, filled with substances of different colors.



“A fine collection of dimples,” William said. “All products of your garden*”

“No,” Severinus said, “many substances, rare, or impossible to grow in this climate, have been 
brought to me over the years by monks arriving from every part of the world. I have many precious 
things that canno† be found readily, along wi†h substances easily ob†ained from †he local flora. 
You see . aghalingho pesto comes from Cathay: I received it from a learned Arab. Indian aloe, 
excellent cicatricizant. Live arient revives the dead, or, rather, wakes those who have lost their 
senses.
Arsenacho: very dangerous, a mortal poison for anyone who swallows it. Borage, a plant good for 
ailing lungs. Betony, good for fractures of the head. Mastic. calms pulmonary fluxions and 
troublesome catarrhs. Myrrh ...”
“The gift of the Magi*” I asked.

The same. But now used to prevent miscarrioge, gathered from a tree called Balsamodendron myrro. 
And this is mumio, very rare, produced by the decomposition of mummified cadavers; it is used in 
the prepqra†ion of many almos† miraculous medicines. Mandragora officinalis, good for sleep ..."
“And to stir desires of the flesh,” my master remarked.

“So they say, but here it is not used for that purpose, as you can imagine.” Severinus smiled. “And 
look at this,” he said, taking down on ampoule. “Tutty, miroculous for the eyes.”

“And what is this*” William asked in a bright voice, touching a stone lying on a shelf.

“Thqt* It wqs given to me some time ago. It apparently hqs therapeutic virtues, but I have not yet 
discovered what they are. Do you know it*”

“Yes,” William said, “but not as a medicine.” He took from his habit o little knife and slowly held 
it
†oward †he s†one. As †he knife, moved by his hand wi†h extreme delicacy, came close †o †he s†one, I 
sow thot the blade made an abrupt movement, as if William had shifted his wrist, which wos, 
however, absolutely still. And the blade stuck to the stone, making a faint metallic sound.

“You see,” William said to me, “it attracts iron.” “And what is its use*” I asked.
“It has various uses, of which I will tell you. But for the present I would like to know, 
Severinus, if there is anythin9here thqt could kill a man.”
Severinus reflected a moment—too long, I would have said, considering the clarity of his answer: 
“Many things. As I said, the line between poison and medicine is very fine: the Greeks used the 
word ’pharmacon’ for both.”

“And there is nothing that has been removed recently*”



Severinus reflected again, then, as if weighing his words: "Nothin9 recently."
“And in the past*“
“Who knows* I don‘t recall. I have been in this abbey thirty years, and twenty-five in the 
infirmary.”

“Too long for a human memory,” William admitted. Then, abruptly, he said, “We were speaking
yesterday of plan†s †ha† can induce visions. Which ones are †hey*”

Severinus‘s actions and the expression on his face indicated an intense desire to avoid that 
subject. “I would hove to think, you know. I have so many miraculous substances here. But let us 
speak, rather, of Venon†ius's dea†h. Wha† do you soy abou† i†*”

“I would have to think,” William answered.

PRIME
In which Benno of Uppsala confides certain things, others are confided by Berengar of Arundel, and 
Adso learns the meaning o true penitence.

The horrible event had upset the life of the community. The confusion caused by the discovery of 
the corpse had interrupted the holy office. The abbot promptly sent the monks back to the choir, to 
pray for the soul of their brother.

The monks' voices were broken. William qnd I chose to sit in a position allowing us to study their 
faces when the liturgy did not require cowls to be lowered. Immediately we saw Berengar's face. 
Pale, drawn, glistening wi†h swea†.

Next to him we noticed Mqlachi. Dark, frowning, impassive. Beside Malqchi, equally impassive, wqs 
the face of the blind Jorge. We observe, on the other hand, the nervous movements of genno of 
Uppsala, the rhetoric scholar we had men the previous day in the scriptorium: and we caught his 
rapid glance at Malachi. "Benno is nervous, Berengar is frightened,“ William remarked. “They must 
be questioned right away.”
“Why*” I asked ingenuously.

“Ours is a hard task,” William said. "A hard task, that of the inquisitor, who must strike the 
weakest, and at their moment of 9•eatest weakness."
In fact, as soon as the office was over, we caught up with Benno, who was heading for the library. 
The young man seemed vexed at hearing William call him, and he muttered some faint pretext about 
work to be done. He seemed in a hurry to get to the scriptorium. But my master reminded him that he 
was carrying out an inquiry at the abbot's behest, and led Benno into the cloister. We sat on the 
inner wall, between two columns. Looking from time to time toward the Aedificium, Benno waited for 
William to speak.



“Well, then,” Williom osked, “what was said that doy when you were discussing Adelmo‘s morginalio 
with Berengar, Venantius, Malachi, and Jorge*”

“You hectrd it yesterdcty. Jorge wets sqying that it is not licit to use ridiculous imctges to 
decorate books †ha† contain †he †ru†h. And Venan†ius observed †ha† Aris†o†le himself had spoken of 
wi††icisms and plays on words as instruments better to reveal the truth, and hence laughter could 
not be such a bad †hing if i† could become a vehicle of †he †ru†h. Jorge said †ha†, as far as he 
could recall, Aris†o†le had spoken of these things in his Poetics, when discussing metaphor. And 
these were in themselves two disturbing circumstances, first because the book of the Poetics, 
unknown to the Christian world for such a long time, which was perhaps by divine decree, had come 
to us through the infidel Moors.  ”
“But it was translated into Latin by a friend of the angelic doctor of Aquino,” William soid.
“That's what I said to him,” Benno replied, immediately heartened. “I read Greek badly and I could 
study that great book only, in fact, through the translation of William of Moerbeke. Yes, that‘s 
what I sqid. But forge qdded that the second cquse for uneasiness is that in the book the Stagirite 
was speaking of poetry, which is infima doctrina and which exists on figments. And Venontius said 
that the psalms, too, are works of poetry and use metaphors; and Jorge became enraged because he 
said the psalms are works of divine inspiration and use metaphors to convey the truth, while the 
works of the pagan poets use metaphors to convey falsehood and for purposes of mere pleasure, a 
remark that greatly offended me.  ”

“Why*”

“Because I am q student of rhetoric, and I read mqny pqgon poets, and I know  or I believe that
their words hove conveyed also truths naturaliter Christian.  In short, at that point, if I recall
correctly, Venantius spoke of other books and Jorge became very angry.”

“Which books*”

Benno hesitated. “I don't remember. What does it matter which books were spoken of*”

“It matters a great deal, because here we ore trying to understand what has happened among men who 
live among books, with books, from books, and so their words on books are also important.”

“It's true,” Benno said, smiling for the first time, his face growing almost radiant. "We live for 
books. A sweet mission m this world dominated by disorder and decoy. Perhaps, then, you will 
understand what hoppened on thctt occasion. Venantius, who knows  who knew Greek very well, said 
thctt Aristotle
had dedicated †he second book of †he Poe†ics specifically †o laughter, and †ho† if a philosopher of 
such greatness had devoted a whole book to laughter, then laughter must be important. Jorge said 
that many fathers had devoted entire books to sin, which is an important thing, but evil; and 
Venantius soid that as far as he knew, Aristotle had spoken of laughter as something good and an 
instrument of truth; and then Jorge asked him contemptuously whether by any chance he had read this 
book of Aristotle; and Venantius said that no one could have read it, because it has never been 
found and is perhaps lost forever. And, in fact, William of Moerbeke never had it in his hands. 
Then Jorge said


thot if it had not been found, this was because it had never been written, because Providence did 
not want futile things glorified. I wanted to calm everyone‘s spirit, because Jorge is easily 
angered and Venantius was speaking deliberately to provoke him, and so I said that in the part of 
the Poetics that we do know, and in the Rhetoric, there are to be found many wise observations on 
witty riddles, and Venantius agreed with me. Now, with us was Pacificus of Tivoli, who knows the 
pagqn poets very well, and he said that when it comes to these witty riddles, no one surpasses the 
African poets. He quoted, in fact, the riddle of the fish, of Symphosius.
Est domus in terris, clora quae voce resultat.
Ipsa domus resonat, tacitus sed non sonat hospes.
Ambo tomen currunt, hospes simul et domus una.
"At this point Jorge said that Jesus had urged our speech to be yes or no, for anything further 
came from the Evil One; and that to mention fish it was enough to say ‘fish,' without concealing 
the notion under lying sounds. And he added that it did not seem to him wise to take the Africans 
qs models. .. And then . “
"Then*"
"Then something happened thot I didn't understand. Berengar began to laugh. Jorge reproached him, 
and he said he was laughing because it had occurred to him that if one sought carefully among the 
Africans, quite different riddles would be found, and not so easy as the one about the fish. 
Malachi, who was present, came furious, took Berengor by the cowl, and sent him off to his tasks.  
Berengor,
you know, is his assistant. "
"And after that*"
“After that, Jorge put an end to the argument by going ctwcty. We all went off to our occupations, 
but as I was working, I saw first Venantius, then Adelmo approach Berengar and ask him something. 
From the distance I saw he was parrying their questions, but in the course of the day both went 
back to him. And then that evening I saw Berengar and Adelmo confabulating in the cloister before 
entering the refectory. There, that's all I know.”

“You know, in fact, that the two persons who have recently died in mysterious circumstances had 
asked something of Berengar,“ William said.

Benno answered uncomfortably, "I didn‘t say that! I told you what happened that dqy, because you 
asked me. ...” He reflected a moment, then hastily added, "But if you want to know my opinion, 
Berengar spoke to them of something in the library, and that is where you should search.”

“Why do you †hink of †he library* Wha† did Berengar mean abou† seeking among †he Africans* Didn‘† 
he mean †ho† the African poets should be more widely read*“



“Perhaps. So it seemed. But then why should Malachi have become furious* After all, he's the one 
who decides whether or no† a volume of African poe†s is given ou† †o be read. Bu† I know one †hing: 
anyone leafing through the catalogue of books will often find, among the collocations that only the 
librarian understands, one that says ’Africa,’ and I have even found one that said 'finis Africae,’ 
the end of Africa. Once I asked for a book †ha† bore †ha† indication, I can‘† recall which book, 
†hough †he †i†Ie had aroused my curiosity; and Malachi †oId me †he books wi†h †ha† indication had 
been los†. This is what I know. And this is why I say you‘re right, check on Berengar, and check 
when he goes up into the library. You never can tell.”
“You never can tell,” William concluded, dismissing him. Then he began strolling with me in the 
cloister and remarked that, first of all, Berengar had once again been the subject of his brothers' 
murmuring; second, Benno seemed eager to direct us to the library. I observed that perhaps he 
wanted us to discover there things he, too, wanted to know: and William said this was probably the 
case, but it was also possible that in directing us toward the library he wanted to keep us away 
from some other place. Which* I osked. And William said he did not know, perhaps the scriptorium, 
perhaps the kitchen, or the choir, or the dormitory, or the infirmary. I remarked that the previous 
day it was he, William, who had been fascinated by the library, and his answer was thqt he wanted 
to be fascinated by the things he chose and not as others advised him. gut the library should be 
kept under observation, he went on, and at this point it would not be a bad idea to try to get into 
it somehow. Circumstances now authorized his curiosity, within the bounds of politeness and respect 
for the customs and laws of the abbey.

We left the cloister. Servants and novices were coming from the church after Mass. And as we walked 
along the west side of the church, we glimpsed Berengar coming out of the transept door and 
crossing the cemetery toward the Aedificium. William called him, he stopped, and we overtook him. 
He was even more dis†raugh† †han when we hqd seen him in choir, qnd William obviously decided †o 
exploi†, qs he had with Benno, this state of his spirit.
“So it seems thot you were the last to see Adelmo alive,” he said.
Berengar staggered, as if he were about to fall in a faint. “I*” he asked in a weak voice. William 
had dropped his question as if by chance, perhaps because Benno had told him of seeing the two 
conferring in the cloister after vespers. But it must have struck home, and clearly Berengar was 
thinking of another, really final meeting, because he began to speak in a halting voice.
“How can you say that* I saw him before going off to bed, like everyone else!”
Then William decided it might be worthwhile to press him without respite. “No, you saw him again, 
and you know more things than you wish to admit. But there are two dectths involved here, and you 
can no longer be silen†. You know very well there are many ways to make a :person speak!”

William had often said to me that, even when he had been an inquisitor, he had always avoided 
torture: but Berengar misunderstood him (or William wanted to be misunderstood). In any case, the 
move wos effective.


“Yes, yes,” Berengar said, bursting into a flood of tears, “I saw Adelmo that evenin9, but I saw 
him already dead!”
“How*” William asked. “At the foot of the hill*”
“No, no, I saw him here in the cemetery, he was moving among the graves, a ghost among ghosts. I 
met him and realized at once that I did not have a living man before me: his face was a corpse's, 
his eyes already beheld the eternal punishment. Naturally, it was only the next morning, when I 
learned of his death, that I understood I had encountered his ghost, but even at thot moment I 
realized I wos having a vision and that there was a damned soul before me, one of the lemures.  Oh, 
Lord, what a
grovelike voice he had as he spoke to me!”

“And who† did he soy*”

" 'I am damned!' Thot is what he said to me. 'As you see me here, you see one returned from hell, 
and to hell I must go back.' So he said to me. And I cried to him, 'Adelmo, have you really come 
from hell* What are the pains of hell like*' And I was trembling, because I hqd just left the 
office of compline where I had heard read the terrible pages on the wrath of the Lord. And he said 
to me, 'The pains of hell are infinitely greater than our tongue can say. You see,' he said, 'this 
cape of sophisms in which I have been dressed till today* It oppresses me and weighs on me as if I 
had the highest tower of Paris or the mountain of the world on my bqck, and nevermore shall I be 
able to set it down. And this pain was given me by divine justice for my vainglory, for having 
believed my body a place of pleasures, and for having thought to know more than others, and for 
having enjoyed monstrous things, which, cherished in my imagination, have produced far more 
monstrous things within my soul—and now I must live with them in eternity. You see the lining of 
this cloak* It is as if it were all coals and ardent fire, and i† is †he fire †ha† burns my body, 
and †his punishmen† is given me for †he dishones† sin of †he flesh, whose vice I knew and 
cultivated, and this fire now unceosingly blazes and burns me! Give me your hand, my beautiful 
mas†er,' he said †o me further, '†ha† my meeting wi†h you may be a useful lesson, in exchange for 
many of the lessons you gave me. Your hand, my beautiful master!' And he shook †he finger of his 
burning hand, and on my hand †here fell a Ii††Ie drop of his swea† ctnd i† seemed to pierce my 
hand. For mony days I bore the sign, only I hid it from all. Then he disappeared among the graves, 
and the next morning I learned that his body, which had so terrified me, was now dead at the foot 
of the cliff.“

Berengar was breathless, weeping. William asked him, “And why did he cqll you his beautiful master* 
You were the same age. Had you perhaps taught him something*”

Berengar hid his head, pulling his cowl over his face, and sank to his knees, embracing William's 
legs. “I don't know why he addressed me like that. I never taught him anything!” And he burst into 
sobs. “I am afraid, Father. I want to confess myself to you, Have mercy, a devil is devouring my 
bowels!”

William thrust him away and held out a hand to draw him to his feet. “No, Berengar,” he said to 
him, “do not ask me to confess you. Do not seal my lips by opening yours. What I want to know from 
you, you will tell me in another way. And if you will not tell me, I will discover it on my own. 
Ask me for mercy, if you like, but do not ask silence of me. Too many are silent in this abbey. 
Tell me, rather, how you saw his pale face if it was darkest night, how he could burn your hand if 
it was a night of rain and hail and


snow, and what you were doin9iF'l the cemetery. Come”—and he shook him brutally by the shoulders— 
“tell me this at least!”

Berengar was trembling in every limb. "I don't know what I was doing in the cemetery, I don't 
remember, I don‘t know how I saw his fqce, perhaps I had a light, no ... he had a light, he was 
carrying a light, perhaps I saw his face in the light of the flame. . “
“How could he carry a light if it was raining and snowing*”
“It was after compline, immediately after compline, it was not snowing yet, the snow began later.  
I
remember that the first flurries began as I was fleeing. toward the dormitory. I was fleeing toward 
the dormitory as the ghost went in the opposite direction.  And after thot I know nothing more;
please, question me no further, if you will not confess me.”
“Very well,” William said, “go now, 6o into the choir, go to speak with the Lord, since you will 
not speak with men, or go and find a monk who will hear your confession, because if you have not 
confessed your sins since then, you have approctched the sctcraments sacrilegiously. Go. We shall 
see each other agctin.”
Berengar ran off and vanished. And William rubbed his hands as I had seen him do in many o†her 
instances when he was pleased with something.

“Good,” he said. “Now many †hings become clear.”

“Clear, master*” I asked him. “Clear now that we also have Adelmo's ghost*”
“My dear Adso,” Willictm sctid, “that ghost does not seem very ghostly to me, ctnd in any case he 
was reciting a page 1 have already read in some book conceived for †he use of preachers. These 
monks read perhaps too much, and when they are excited they relive visions they learned from books. 
I don't know whether Adelmo really said those things or whether Berengar simply heard them because 
he needed to hear them. The fctct remains thot this story confirms a series of my suppositions. For 
example: Adelmo died a suicide, and Berengar‘s story tells us thot, before dying, he went around in 
the grip of a great agitation, and in remorse for some act he had committed. He was agitated and 
frightened about his sin because someone had frightened him, and perhaps had told him the very 
episode of the infernol apparition thot he recited to Berengar with such hallucinated mastery. And 
he was going through the cemetery because he was leaving the choir, where he had confided (or 
confessed) to someone who had filled him with terror and remorse. And from the cemetery he was 
heading, as Berengar informed us, in the opposite direction from the dormitory. Toward the 
Aedificium, then, but also (it is possible) toward the outside wall behind the stables, from where 
I hove deduced he must have thrown himself into the chasm. And he threw himself down before the 
storm came, he died at the foot of the wall, and only later did the landslide carry his corpse 
between the north tower and the eastern one.”

“Bu† wha† abou† †he drop of burning swea†*”

“It was already part of the story he heard and repeated, or that Berengar imagined, in his 
agitation and his remorse. Because there is, as antistrophe to Adelmo's remorse, a remorse of 
Berengar's: you


heard it. And if Adelmo came from the choir, he was perhaps carrying a taper, and the drop on his 
friend's hand was only a drop of wax. But Berengar felt it burn much deeper because Adelmo surely 
called him his master. A sign, then, that Adelmo was reproaching him for having taught him 
something that now caused him to despair unto death. And Berengar knows it, he suffers because he 
knows he drove Adelmo †o dea†h by making him do something he should no† have done. And i† is no† 
difficul† †o imagine what, my poor Adso, after what we have heard about our assistant librarian.“

“I believe I understand what happened between the two,” I said, embarrassed by my own wisdom, “but 
don’† all of us believe in a God of mercy* Adelmo, you soy, had probably confessed: why did he seek 
†o punish his first sin with a sin surely greater still, or at least of equal gravity*”

“Because someone said words of desperation to him. As I soid, o page of a modern preocher must have 
prompted someone to repeot the words that frightened Adelmo and with which Adelmo frightened 
Berengar. In these last few years, as never before, to stimulate piety and terror and fervor in the 
populace, and obedience to humon and divine low, preochers have used distressing words, macabre 
threats. Never before, as in our days, amid processions of flagellants, were sacred lauds heard 
inspired by the sorrows of Christ and of the Virgin, never has there been such insistence as there 
is today on strengthening the faith of the simple through the depiction of infernal torments.”
“Perhaps it is the need for penitence,” I said.

“Adso, I have never heard so mony calls to penitence as today, in a period when, by now, neither 
preachers nor bishops nor even my brothers the Spirituals are any longer capable of inspiring true 
repentance. ”
“But the third age, the Angelic Pope, the chapter of Perugia ” I said, bewildered.

“Nostalgia. The great age of penitence is over, and for this reason even the general chapter of the 
order con speak of penitence. There was, one hundred, two hundred years ago, a great wind of 
renewal. There was ct time when those who spoke of it were burned, saint or heretic qs they mcty 
hctve been. Now all speak of it. In a certain sense even the Pope discusses it. Don't trust 
renewals of the human race when curias and courts speak of them.”

“But Fro Dolcino,” I ventured, curious to know more about thot name I hod heard uttered several 
times the day before.

“He died, and died dreadfully, as he lived, because he also came too late. And, anyway, what do you 
know of him*”

“Nothing. That is why I ask you. ”

"I would prefer never to speak of him. I have had to deal with some of the so-called Apostles, and 
I hove observed †hem closely. A sad s†ory. I† would upse† you. In any case, i† upse† me, and you 
would be all †he more upse† by my inability †o judge. I†’s †he s†ory of a man who did insane †hings 
becouse he put into practice what many saints had preached. At a certain point I could no longer 
understand whose fault it was, I was as if  as if dazed by an air of kinship that wafted over the 
two opposing


camps, of saints who preached penitence and sinners who put it into practice, often at the expense 
of others. ... But I was speaking of something else. Or perhaps not. I wos speoking really of this: 
when the epoch of penitence was over, for penitents the need for penance became a need for death. 
And they who killed the crazed penitents, repaying death with death, to defeat true penitence, 
which produced death, replaced the penitence of the soul with a penitence of the imagination, a 
summons to superna†uroI visions of suffering and blood, calling †hem †he ’mirror’ of †rue 
peni†ence. A mirror †ha† brings to life, for the imagination of the simple and sometimes even of 
the learned, the torments of hell. So †ha†—i† is said—no one shall sin. They hope †o keep souls 
from sin through fear, and †rus† †o replace rebellion with fear.”
“But won't they truly sin then*” I asked anxiously.

“It depends on what you mean by sinning, Adso,” my master said. “I would not like to be unjust 
toward the people of this country where I have been living for some years, but it seems to me 
typical of the scan† virtue of the Italian peoples to abstain from sin ou† of their fear of some 
idol, though they may give it the name of a saint. They ore more afraid of Saint Sebastian or Saint 
Anthony than of Christ. If you wish to keep a place clean here, to prevent qnyone from pissing on 
it, which the Italians do as freely as dogs do, you paint on it an image of Saint Anthony with a 
wooden tip, and this will drive away those about to piss. So the Italians, thanks to their 
preachers, risk returning to the ancient superstitions; and they no longer believe in the 
resurrection of the flesh, but have only a great fear of bodily injuries and misfortunes, and 
therefore they are more afraid of Saint Anthony than of Christ.”
“But Berengar isn‘t Italian,” I pointed out.

“It makes no difference. I am speaking of the atmosphere that the church and the preaching orders 
hqve spread over this peninsula, and which from here spreads everywhere. And it reaches even a 
veneroble abbey of learned monks, like †hese.”

“But if only they didn‘t sin,” I insisted, becouse I was prepared to be satisfied with this alone. 
“If this abbey were a speculum mundi, you would already have the answer.”
“But is it*” I asked.

“In order for there to be a mirror of the world, it is necessary that the world have q form,” 
concluded William, who was too much of a philosopher for my adolescent mind.

TERCE

In which the visitors witness a brawl among vulgar persons, Aymaro of Alessandria makes some 
allusions, and Adso meditates on saintliness and on the dung of the Devil. Subsequently William and 
Adso go back to the scriptorium, William sees something interesting, has a third conversation on 
the licitness of laughter, but in the end is unable to look where he wishes.


Before climbing up to the scriptorium, we stopped by the kitchen to refresh ourselves, for we had 
portaken of nothing since rising. I drank a bowl of warm milk and was heartened at once. The great 
south fireplace was already blazing like a forge while the day‘s bread baked in the oven. Two 
herdsmen were se††ing down †he body of a freshly slaughtered sheep. Among †he cooks I saw 
Salva†ore, who smiled at me with his wolf's mouth. And I saw that he was tctking from a table a 
scrap of chicken left over from the night before and stealthily passing it to the herdsmen, who hid 
the food in their sheepskin jerkins with pleased grins. But the chief cook noticed and scolded 
Salvatore. “Cellarer, cellarer,” he said, “u must look after the goods of the abbey, not squander 
them!”
“Filii Dei they are,” said Salvatore, “Jesus has said that you do for him what you do for one of 
these pueri!”

“Filthy Fraticello, fart of a Minorite!” the cook shouted at him. “You‘re not among those 
louse-bitten friars of yours any morel The abbot's charity will see to the feeding of the children 
of God!”

Salvatore's face turned grim and he swung around, in a rage: “I am not a Minorite frior! I am a 
monk Sancti Benedicti! Merdre a toy, Bogomil de merdre!”
“Call Bogomil that whore you screw at night, with your heretic cock, you pig!” the cook cried.

Salvatore thrust the herdsmen through the door and, passing close to us, looked at us, worried. 
“Brother,” he said to William, “you defend the order thot is not mine; tell him the filii de 
Francesco non sunt hereticos!” Then he whispered into an ear, “IIIe menteur, puah!” and he spat on 
the ground.

The cook came over and roughly pushed him out, shutting the door after him. “Brother,” he said to 
William with respect, “I was not speaking ill of your order or of the most holy men who belong to 
it. I was speaking to that false Minorite and false benedictine who is neither flesh nor fowl.”

“I know where he come from,” William said, conciliatory. “But now he is a monk os you are and you 
owe him fraternal respect.”

“But he sticks his nose in where he has no business only because he is under the cellarer's 
protection and believes himself the cellarer. He uses the abbey as if it belonged to him, day and 
night.”

“How at night*” William asked. The cook made a gesture as if to say he was unwillin9‹ speak of 
thin9s that were not virtuous. William questioned him no further and finished drinking his milk.

My curiosity was becoming more and more aroused. The meeting with Ubertino, the muttering about the 
past of Salvatore and his cellarer, the more and more frequent references to the Fraticelli and
†he heretic Minori†es I had heard in †hose days, my mas†er’s reluctance †o speak †o me abou† Fro 
Dolcino ... A series of images began to return to my mind. For example, in the course of our 
journey we had a† leas† †wice come upon a procession of fIageIIan†s. Once †he local populace was 
looking a† †hem as if they were saints; the other time there was murmuring that these were 
heretics. And yet they were the same people. They walked in procession two by two, through the 
streets of the city, only their pudenda covered, as they had gone beyond any sense of shame. Each 
carried a leather lash in his hand and hit himself on the shoulders till blood came; and they were 
shedding abundant tears as if


they saw with their own eyes the Passion of the Saviour; in a mournful chant they implored the 
Lord's mercy and the intercession of the Mother of God. Not only during the day but also at night, 
with lighted tapers, in the harsh winter, they went in a great throng from church to church, 
prostrating themselves humbly before the altars, preceded by priests with candles and banners, and 
they were
not only men and women of the populace, but also noble ladies qnd merchants.  And then great acts 
of
penance were to be seen: those who had stolen gave back their loot, others confessed their crimes.
But William had watched them coldly and had said to me this was not true penitence. He spoke then 
much as he had only a short while ago, this very morning: the period of the great penitential 
cleansing was finished, and these were the ways preachers now organized the devotion of the mobs, 
precisely so thot they would not succumb to a desire for penance that—in this case—really was 
heretical and frightened all. But I was unable to understand the difference, if there actually was 
any. It seemed to me that the difference did not lie in the actions of the one or the other, but in 
the church's attitude when she judged this act or that.

I remembered the discussion with Ubertino. William had undoubtedly been insinuating, had tried to 
scty to him, that there wets little difference between his mystic (ctnd orthodox) faith and the 
distorted fai†h of †he heretics. Ubertino had †aken offense, as one who saw †he difference clearly. 
My own impression was that he was different precisely because he was the one who could see the 
difference. William had renounced the duties of inquisitor because he could no longer see it. For 
this reason he was unable to speak to me of that mysterious Fra Dolcino. But then, obviously (I 
said to myself), William has lost the assistance of the Lord, who not only teaches how to see the 
difference, but also invests his elect with this capacity for discrimination. Ubertino and Clare of 
Montefalco (who was, however, surrounded by sinners) had remained saints precisely because they 
knew how to discriminate. This and only †his is sanc†i†y.

But why did William not know how to discriminate* He was such an ocute man, and as far as the facts 
of nature went, he could perceive the slightest discrepancy or the slightest kinship between 
things. ...

I was immersed in these thoughts, and William was finishing his milk, when we hectrd someone greet 
us. It was Aymaro of Alessandria, whom we had met in the scriptorium, and who had struck me by the 
expression of his face, a perpetual sneer, as if he could never reconcile himself to the 
fatuousness of all human beings and ye† did no† a††ach grea† importance †o †his cosmic tragedy. 
“Well, Brother William, hove you already become accustomed to this den of madmen*”
“It seems to me a place of men admirable in sanctity and learning,” William said cautiously.
“I† was. When abbots acted as abbots and librarians as librarians. Now you have seen, up there”—and 
he nodded towqrd the floor above—“that half-dead German with q blind man's eyes, listening devoutly 
to the savings of that blind Spaniard with a dead man's eyes; it would seem as though the 
Antichrist were to arrive every morning. They scrape their parchments, but few new books come in.  
We are up
here, and down below in the city they act. Once our abbeys ruled the world. Today you see the 
situation: the Emperor uses us, sending his friends here to meet his enemies (I know something of 
your mission, monks talk and talk, they have nothing else to do); bu† if he wants to control the 
affairs of this country, he remains in the city. We are busy gathering grain and raising fowl, and 
down there they trade lengths of silk for pieces of linen, and pieces of linen for sacks of spices, 
and all of them


for good money. We guard our treasure, but down there they pile up treasures. And qlso books. More
beautiful †hon ours, †oo.”

“In the world many new things are happening, to be sure. But why do you think the abbot is to 
blame*”

“Because he has handed the library over to foreigners and directs the abbey like a citadel erected 
to defend †he library. A Benedictine abbey in †his Italian region should be a place where italians 
decide Italian questions. What are the Italians doing today, when they no longer have even a pope* 
They are trafficking, and manufacturing, and they ore richer than the King of France. So, then, let 
us do the same; since we know how to make beautiful books, we should make them for the universities 
and concern ourselves with what is happening down in the valley—I do not mean with the Emperor, 
with all due respect for your mission, Brother William, but with what the Bolognese or the 
Florentines ore doing. From here we could control the route of pilgrims and merchants who go from 
Italy to Provence and vice versa. We should open the library to texts in the vernacular, and those 
who no longer write in Latin will also come up here. But instead we are controlled by a group of 
foreigners who continue to manage the library as if the good Odo of Cluny were still abbo†.  ”
“Bu† your abbo† is Italian,” William said.

“The abbot here counts for nothing,” Aymaro said, still sneering. “In the place of his head he has 
a bookcase. Wormea†en. To spi†e †he Pope he allows †he abbey †o be invaded by Fra†icelli.  I mean 
†he
here†icoI ones, Brother, †hose who have abandoned your mos† holy order  ond †o please †he Emperor
he invites monks from all the monasteries of the North, as if we did not have fine copyists and men 
who know Greek and Arabic in our country, and as if in Florence or Pisa †here were no† sons of 
merchants, rich and generous, who would gladly enter the order, if the order offered the 
possibility of enhancing their fathers' prestige and power. But here indulgence in secular matters 
is recognized only when the Sermons are allowed to  O good Lord, strike my tongue, for I am about 
to say improper
things!”

“Do improper †hings †ake plqce in †he abbey*” William asked absently, pouring himself a bi† more 
milk.

“A monk is also human,” Aymaro declared. Then he added, “But here they are less human than 
elsewhere. And what I have said: remember that I did not say it.”

“Very interesting,” William said. “And are these your personal opinions, or are there many who 
think as you do*”

“Mony, many. Many who now mourn the loss of poor Adelmo, but if another had fallen into the obyss, 
someone who moves about the library more than he should, they would not have been displeased.”

“What do you mean*”

“I hove talked too much. Here we tolk too much, as you must hove noticed already. Here, on the one 
hond, nobody respects silence any more. On the other, it is respected too much. Here, instead of 
talking or remaining silent, we should act. In the golden age of our order, if an abbot did not 
have the temper of an abbot, a nice goblet of poisoned wine would make way for a successor. I have 
said these



†hings to you, Brother William, obviously no† †o gossip abou† †he ctbbo† or o†her brothers. God 
save me, for†una†ely I do no† have †he nas†y habi† of gossiping. Bu† I would be displeased if †he 
abbo† had asked you to investigate me or some others like Pacificus of Tivoli or Peter of 
Sant’AIbano. We have no say in the affairs of the library. But we would like to have a bit of say. 
So uncover this nest of serpents, you who hctve burned so mctny heretics.”

“I have never burned anyone,“ William replied sharply.
“It was just o figure of speech,“ Aymoro confessed with o brood smile. "Good hunting, Brother 
William, but be careful at night.“
“Why not during! the day*”
“Because during the day here the body is tended with good herbs, but at night the mind falls ill 
with bad herbs. Do no† believe †ha† Adelmo was pushed in†o †he obyss by someone's hands or †ha† 
someone's hands pu† Venan†ius in †he blood. Here someone does no† wan† †he monks †o decide for 
themselves where to go, what to do, and whqt to read. And the powers of hell are employed, or the 
powers of the necromancers, friends of hell, to derange the minds of the curious. “

"Are you speaking of the father herbalist*”
"Severinus of Sank† Wendel is o good person. Of course, he is also a German, os Molochi is o 
German.
..." And, having shown once again his aversion to gossip, Aymaro went up to work.
“What did he wont to tell us*” I asked.
"Everything and nothing. An abbey is always a place where monks are in conflict among themselves to 
gain control of the community. At Melk, too, but perhaps as a novice you were not able to realize 
it. But in your country, gaining control of an abbey means winning a position in which you deal 
directly with the Emperor. In this country, on the other hand, the situation is different; the 
Emperor is far awqy, even when he comes all the way down to Rome. There is no cour†, no† even the 
papal cour† now. There are the cities, as you will have seen.”

“Certainly, and I was impressed by them. A city in Italy is something different from one in my 
land. It is not only a place to live, it is also a place to decide, the people ctre alwctys in the 
square, the city magistrates count far more than the Emperor or the Pope. The cities are like ... 
so many kingdoms. “

“And the kings are the merchants. And their weapon is money. Money, in Italy, has a different 
function from whqt it has in your country, or in mine. Money circulates everywhere, but much of 
life elsewhere is still dominated and regulated by the bartering of goods, chickens or sheaves of 
wheat, or a scythe, or a wagon, and money serves only to procure these goods. In the Italian city, 
on the contrary, you must have noticed that goods serve to procure money. And even priests, 
bishops, even religious orders have to take money into account. This is why, naturally, rebellion 
against power takes the form of a call to poverty. The rebels agains† power are those denied any 
connection with money, and so every call to poverty provokes great tension and argument, and the 
whole city, from bishop to magistrate, considers a personal enemy the one who preaches poverty too 
much. The inquisitors smell


the stink of the Devil where someone has reacted to the stink of the Devil's dung. And now you can 
understand also what Aymaro is thinking about. A Benedictine abbey, in the golden period of the 
order, was the place from which shepherds controlled the flock of the faithful. Aymaro wants a 
return to the tradition. Only the life of the flock has changed, and the abbey can return to the 
tradition (to its glory, to its former power) only if it accepts the new ways of the flock, 
becoming different itself. And since today the flock here is dominated, not with weapons or the 
splendor of ritual, but with the control of money, Aymaro wants the whole fabric of the abbey, and 
the library i†seIf, †o become a workshop, a factory for making money.“
“And what does this have to do with the crimes, or the crime*” “I don't know yet. But now I would 
like to go upstairs. Come.”
The monks were already at work. Silence reigned in the scriptorium, but it was not the silence that 
comes from the industrious peace of all hearts. Berengar, who had preceded us by only a short time, 
received us with embarrassment. The other monks looked up from their work. They knew we were there 
to discover something qbout Venqntius, and the very direction of their gaze drew our attention to o 
vacant desk, under a window that opened onto the interior, the central octagon.

Although it was a very cold day, the temperature in the scriptorium was rather mild. It was not by 
chance that it had been situated above the kitchen, whence came adequate heat, especially because 
the flues of the two ovens below passed inside the columns supporting the two circular staircases 
in the west and south towers. As for the north tower, on the opposite side of the great room, it 
had no stair, but a big fireplace that burned and spread a happy warmth. Moreover, the floor had 
been covered with straw, which muffled our footsteps. In other words, the least-heated corner was 
that of the east tower, and in fact I noticed that, although there were few places left vacant, 
given the number of monks at work, all of the monks tended to avoid the desks located in that port. 
When I later realized that the circular staircase of the east tower was the only one that led, not 
only down to the refectory, but also up to the library, I osked myself whether a shrewd calculation 
had not regulated the heating of the room so thctt the monks would be discourctged from 
investigctting that area and the librarian could more easily control the access to the library.

Poor Venantius's desk had its back to the great fireplace, and it was probably one of the most 
desired. At that time I had passed very little of my life in a scriptorium, but I spent a great 
deal of it subsequently qnd I know what torment it is for the scribe, the rubricator, the scholar 
to spend the long winter hours at his desk, his fingers numb around the stylus (when even in a 
normal temperature, after six hours of writing, the fingers are seized by the terrible monk's cramp 
and the thumb aches as if it had been trodden on). And this explains why we often find in the 
margins of a monuscript phrases left by the scribe as testimony to his suffering (qnd his 
impatience), such as “Thank God it will soon be dark,” or “Oh, if I had a good glass of wine,” or 
olso “Today it is cold, the light is dim, this vellum is hairy, something is wrong.” As an ancient 
proverb says, three fingers hold the pen, but the whole body works. And aches.

Bu† I wos Selling obou† Venon†ius’s desk. I† was ro†her smoll, like †he o†hers se† oround †he 
octagonal courtyard, since they were meant for scholars, whereas the larger ones under the windows 
of the outer walls were meant for illuminators and copyists. Venantius also worked with a lectern, 
because he


probably consuI†ed manuscripts on loan †o †he abbey, of which he mctde a copy. Under †he desk was a 
low set of shelves piled with unbound sheets, and since they were all in Latin, I deduced they were 
his most recent translations. They were written hastily and did not represent the pages of a book, 
for they had yet to be entrusted to a copyist and an illuminator. For this reason they were 
difficult to read. Among the pages were a few books, in Greek. Another Greek book was open on the 
lectern, the work on which Venantius had been exercising his skill as translator in the past days. 
At that time I knew no Greek, but my master read the title and said this was by a certain Lucian 
and was the story of a man turned into an ass. I recalled then a similar fable by Apuleius, which, 
as a rule, novices were strongly advised against reading.
“Why was Venantius making this translation*” William asked Berengar, who was at our side.

“The abbey was asked to do i† by the lord of Milan, and the abbey will gain from i† a preferential 
righ† to the wine production of some farms to the east of here.” Beren9ar pointed with his hand 
toward the distance. But he promptly added, “Not that the abbey performs venol tasks for laymen. 
But the lord who has given us this commission went to great pains to have this precious Greek 
manuscript lent us by the Doge of Venice, who received it from the Emperor of Byzantium, and when 
Venantius had finished his work, we would have mode †wo copies, one for †he lord of Milan and one 
for our library.”

“Which therefore does not disdain to add pagan fables to its collection,” William said.

“The library is †es†imony †o †ru†h and †o error,” o voice †hen said behind us. I† was Jorge. Once 
again I was amazed (but I was to be amazed often in the days that followed) by the old man's way of 
suddenly, unexpectedly appearing, as if we did not see him and he did see us. I wondered also why 
on ear†h o blind mon was in †he scrip†orium, bu† I realized Ia†er †ha† Jorge was omnipresen† in all 
corners of the qbbey. And often he was in the scriptorium, seated on a stool by the fireplace, and 
he seemed to follow everything going on in the room. Once I heard him ask from his place, in a loud 
voice, “Who is going upstairs*” and he turned to Malachi, who was going toward the library, his 
steps silenced by the straw. The monks all held him in high esteem and often had recourse to him, 
reading him passages difficult to understand, consulting him for a gloss, or qsking counsel on how 
to depict qn animal or o soint. And he would look into the void with his spent eyes, as if staring 
at pages vivid in his memory, and he would answer that false prophets are dressed like bishops and 
frogs come from their mouths, or would say what stones were to adorn the walls of the heavenly 
Jerusalem, or that the Arimaspi should be depicted on maps near the land of Prestel John—urging 
thot their monstrosity not be mqde excessively seductive, for it sufficed to portray them as 
emblems, recognizable, but not desirable, or repellent to the point of laughter.

Once I heard him advise a scholiast on how to interpret the recapitulatio in the texts of Tyconius 
according to the thought of Saint Augustine, so that the Donatist heresy could be avoided. Another 
time I heard him give advice on how, in making commentary, to distinguish heretics from 
schismatics. Or again, he told a puzzled scholar what book to seek in the library catalogue, and 
more or less on what page he would find it listed, assuring him that the librarian would certainly 
give it to him because i† was a work inspired by God. Finally, on another occasion I heard him say 
†ha† such-and-such a book should no† be sough† because, †hough i† did indeed exis† in †he 
catalogue, i† had been ruined by mice fifty years earlier, and by now it would crumble to powder in 
the fingers of anyone who touched it. He was, in other words, the library's memory and the soul of 
the scriptorium. At times he admonished


monks he heard chatting among themselves: “Hurry, and leave testimony to the truth, for the time is 
at hand!” He wos referring to the coming of the Antichrist.
“The library is testimony to truth and to error,” Jorge said.
“Undoubtedly Apuleius and Lucian were reputed to be magicians,” William said. “But this fable, 
beneath the veil of its fictions, contains also a good moral, for it teaches how we pay for our 
errors, and, furthermore, I believe that the story of the man transformed into an ass refers to the 
metamorphosis of the soul that falls into sin.”
“That may be,” Jorge said.
“But now I understand why, during that conversation of which I was told yesterday, Venantius was so 
interested in the problems of comedy; in fact, fqbles of this sort can also be considered kin to 
the comedies of the ancients. Both tell not of men who really existed, as tragedies do; on the 
contrary, as Isidore says, they are fictions: ’fobulas poetae a fando nominoverunt, quio non sunt 
res factae sed tantum loquendo fictqe. ’ ”

At first I could not understand why William had embarked on this learned discussion, and with a man 
who seemed to dislike such subjects, but Jorge's reply told me how subtle my master had been.

“That day we were not discussing comedies, but only the licitness of laughter,” Jorge said grimly. 
I remembered very well that when Venantius had referred to that discussion, only the day before, 
Jorge had claimed not to remember it.
“Ah,” William said casually, “I thought you had spoken of poets' lies and shrewd riddles. ”
“We talked about laughter,” Jorge said sharply. “The comedies were written by the pagans to move 
spectators to laughter, and they acted wrongly. Our Lord Jesus never told comedies or fables, but 
only clear pctrables which allegorically instruct us on how to win paradise, and so be it.”
“I wonder,” William said, “why you are so opposed to the idea that Jesus may have laughed. I 
believe laughter is a good medicine, like ba†hs, †o †rea† humors and †he o†her afflictions of †he 
body, melancholy in particular.”

“Baths are a good thing,” Jorge said, “and Aquinas himself advises them for dispelling sadness, 
which can be a bad passion when it is not addressed to an evil that can be dispelled through 
boldness. Baths restore the balance of the humors. Laughter shakes the body, distorts the feotures 
of the face, makes man similar to the monkey.”
“Monkeys do no† laugh; laughter is proper †o man, i† is a sign of his ra†ionali†y,” William said. 
“Speech is also a sign of human rationality, and with speech a man con blaspheme against God. Not
everything thot is proper to mon is necessarily good. He who laughs does not believe in what he 
laughs at, but neither does he hate it. Therefore, laughing at evil means not preparing oneself to 
combat it, and laughing at good means denying the power through which good is self-propagating. 
This is why the


Rule says, 'The tenth de9•ee of humility is not to be quick to laughter, as it is written. stultus 
in risu exaI†a† vocem suam.’ ”

“Quintilian,” my master interrupted, "says that laughter is to be repressed in the panegyric, for 
the sctke of dignity, but it is to be encouraged in many other cases. Pliny the Younger wrote, 
’Sometimes I laugh, I jest, I play, becouse I am a man.’ ”

“They were pagans,” Jorge replied. “The Rule forbids with stern words these trivialities: 
’Scurrilitates vero vel verba otioso et risum moventia aeterno clausura in omnibus locis damnomus, 
et ad tolia eloquia discipulum aperire os non permittimus.‘ ”

“But once the word of Christ had triumphed on the earth, Synesius of Cyrene soid that the divinity 
could harmoniously combine comic and tragic, and Aelius Spartionus said of the Emperor Hadrian, man 
of lofty behavior and of naturaliter Christian spirit, that he could mingle moments of gaiety with 
moments of grovity. And finally Ausonius recommended moderate use of the serious and the jocose.”

“But Pqulinus of Nolq and Clement of Alexandria put us on guard against such foolishness, and 
Sulpicius Severus said that no one ever saw Saint Martin in the grip of wrath or in the grip of 
hilarity.”

“But he recalled some replies of the saint spiritualiter salsa,” William said.

“They were prompt and wise, not ridiculous. Soint Ephraim wrote an exhortotion agoinst the laughter 
of monks, and in the De habitu et conversatione monachorum there is a strong warning to avoid 
obscenity and wi††icisms as if †hey were asp venom!”

“But Hildebertus said, ’Admittenda tibi ioca sunt post seria quaedam, sed tqmen et dignis ipsa 
gerenda modis.’ And John of Solisbury authorized a discreet hilarity. And finally Ecclesiastes, 
whom you quoted in the passage to which your Rule refers, where it says that laughter is proper to 
the fool, permits at least silent loughter, in the serene spirit.”

The spirit is serene only when it contemplates the truth ond takes delight in good ochieved, ond 
truth and good are not to be laughed at. This is why Christ did not laugh. Laughter foments doubt.“

“But sometimes it is right to doubt.”

“I cannot see any reason. When you are in doubt, you must turn to an authority, to the words of a 
fa†her or of a doc†or; †hen all reason for doub† ceases. You seem †o me steeped in debatable 
doctrines, like those of the logicians of Paris. But Saint Bernard knew well how to intervene 
against the castrate Abelard, who wqnted to submit all problems to the cold, lifeless scrutiny of 
reason not enlightened by Scripture, pronouncing his It-is-so and It-is-not-so. Certainly one who 
accepts dangerous ideas can also appreciate the jesting of the ignorant man who laughs at the sole 
truth one should know, which has already been said once and for all. With his laughter the fool 
says in his heart, ’Deus non est.‘ ”
“Venerable Jorge, you seem to me unjust when you call Abelard a castrate, because you know that he 
incurred that sad condition through the wickedness of others. ”



“For his sins. For the pride of his faith in man's reason. So the faith of the simple was mocked, 
the mysteries of God were eviscerated (or at least this was tried, fools they who tried), questions 
concerning the loftiest things were treated recklessly, the fathers were mocked because they had 
considered that such questions should have been subdued, rqther than rqised.”

“I do not agree, venerable Jorge. Of us God demands that we apply our reason to many obscure things 
about which Scripture has left us free to decide. And when someone suggests you believe in a 
proposition, you mus† firs† examine i† to see whether i† is acceptable, because our reason was 
created by God, and whatever pleases our reason can but please divine reason, of which, for that 
matter, we know only wha† we infer from †he processes of our own reason by analogy and of†en by 
negation. Thus, you see, to undermine the false authority of an absurd proposition thot offends 
reason, laughter can sometimes also be a suitable instrument. And laughter serves to confound the 
wicked and to make their foolishness evident. It is told of Saint Maurus that when the pagans put 
him in boilin9 water, he complained that the bath was too cold; the pagan governor foolishly put 
his hand in the water to test it, and burned himself. A fine action of that sainted martyr who 
ridiculed the enemies of the faith.”

Jorge sneered. “Even in the episodes the preachers tell, there are many old wives‘ tales. A saint 
immersed in boiling water suffers for Christ and restrains his cries, he does not play childish 
tricks on the pagans!”

“You see*” William said. “This s†ory seems †o you offensive †o reason and you occuse i† of being 
ridiculous! Though you are controlling your lips, you are tacitly laughing at something, nor do you 
wish me to take it seriously. You are laughing at laughter, but you are laughing.”

Jorge mqde q gesture of irritation. “Jesting about laughter, you draw me into idle debqte. But you 
know that Christ did not laugh.”

“I am not sure of that. When he invites the Pharisees to cast the first stone, when he asks whose 
image is ob the coin to be paid in tribute, when he plays on words and sqys 'Tu es petrus,’ I 
believe he was making witticisms to confound sinners, to keep up the spirits of his disciples. He 
speaks with wit also when he says to Caiaphas, 'Thou hast said it.’ And you well know that in the 
most heated moment of the conflict between Cluniacs and Cistercians, the former accused the latter, 
to make them look ridiculous, of not wearing trousers. And in the Speculum stultorum it is narrated 
of the ass Brunellus thot he wonders what would happen if at night the wind lifted the blankets and 
the monks sqw their own pudenda.  ”

The monks gathered around. laughed, and Jorge became infuriated: “You ore drawing these brothers of 
mine into a feast of fools. I know that amon9the Frqnciscans it is the custom to curry the crowd‘s 
favor with nonsense of this kind, but of such tricks I will soy to you what is said in a verse I 
heard from one of your preachers: Turn podex carmen extulit horridulum.”
The reprimand was a bi† †oo s†rong. Williom had been imper†inen†, bu† now Jorge was occusing him of 
breaking wind through the mouth. I wondered if this stern reply did not signify, on the part of the 
elderly monk, an invitation to leave the scriptorium. But I saw William, so mettlesome a moment 
earlier, now become meek.



“I beg your pardon, venerable Jorge,” he said. “My mouth has betrayed my thoughts. I did not wont 
to show you a lack of respect. Perhaps what you say is correct, and I was mistaken.”

Jorge, faced by this act of exquisite humility, emitted a grunt that could express either 
satisfaction or forgiveness; and he could only go back to his seat, while the monks who had 
gradually collected during the argument scattered to their places. William knelt again at 
Venantius's desk and resumed searching through the paper. With his humble reply, William had gained 
a few seconds of quiet. And what he saw in those few seconds inspired his investigation during the 
night that was to come.

But they were really only a few seconds. Benno came over at once, pretending he had forgotten his 
stylus on the desk when he had approached to hear the conversation with Jorge; and he whispered to 
William thot he had to speak with him urgently, fixing a meeting ploce behind the balneary. He told 
William to leave first, and he would join him in a short while.

William hesitated a few moments, then called Molochi, who, from his librarian's desk near the 
catalogue, had followed everything that had happened. William begged him, in view of the injunction 
received from †he abbo† (and he heovily emphasized †his privilege), †o hove someone guard 
Venon†ius’s desk, because William considered it important to his inquiry that no one approach it 
throughout the day, until he himself could come back. He said this in a loud voice, and so not only 
committed Malachi
†o keep wa†ch over †he monks, bu† also se† †he monks themselves †o keep wa†ch over Malachi. The 
librarian could only consen†, ond William and I †ook our leave.

As we were crossing the garden and approaching the balneary, which was next to the infirmary 
building, William observed, “Many seem to be afroid I might find something that is on or under 
Venantius's desk.”

“What can that be*”
“I hctve the impression that even those who ctre afraid do not know.”
And so Benno has nothing to say to us and he is only drawing us far away from the scriptorium*“ “We 
will soon find out,” William soid. In fact, a short while later Benno joined us.

SEXT

In which Benno tells a strange tale from which unedifying things about the life of the nbbey are 
learned.

What Benno told us was quite confused. It really seemed that he had drawn us down there only to 
lure us away from the scrip†orium, bu† i† also seemed †ha†, incapable of inventing a plausible 
pre†ex†, he was telling us fragments of a truth of vaster dimensions than he knew.


He admitted he had been reticent that morning, but now, on sober consideration, he felt William 
should know the whole truth. During the famous conversation about laughter, Berengar had referred
†o †he “finis Africoe.“ Wha† was i†* The library was full of secrets, and especially of books †ha† 
had never been given †o †he monks †o read. Benno had been s†ruck by William's words on †he rational 
scrutiny of propositions. He considered that a monk-scholar had q right to know everything the 
library contained, he uttered words of fire agains† the Council of Soissons, which had condemned 
Abelard, and while he spoke we realized that this monk was still young, that he delighted in 
rhetoric, was stirred by yearnings toward freedom, and was having a hard time accepting the 
limitations the discipline of the abbey set on his intellectual curiosity. I hove earned always to 
distrust such curiosity, but I know well this attitude did not displease my master, and I saw he 
was sympathizing with Benno and giving him credence. In short, Benno told us he did not know what 
secrets Adelmo, Venontius, and Berengar had discussed, but he would not be sorry if as a result of 
this sad story a bit more light were to be cast on the running of the library, and he hoped that my 
master, however he might unravel the tangle of the inquiry, would have reason to urge the abbot to 
relax the intellectual discipline that oppressed the monks—some from far places, like himself, he 
added, who had come for the express purpose of nourishing the mind on the marvels hidden in the 
vast womb of the library.

I believe genno was sincere in expecting of the inquiry what he said. Probably, however, as William 
hod foreseen, he wanted at the same time to retain for himself the possibility of rummaging in 
Venantius's desk first, devoured as he was by curiosity, and in order to keep us away from that 
desk, he was prepared to give us information in exchange. And here is what it was.

Berengar was consumed, as many of the monks now knew, by an insane passion for Adelmo, the same 
passion whose evils divine wrath had castigated in Sodom and Gomorrah. So Benno expressed himself, 
perhaps out of regard for my tender years. But anyone who has spent his adolescence in a monastery, 
even if he has kept himself chctste, often hears tqlk of such pctssions, and at times he has to 
protect himself from the snares of those enslaved by them. Little novice that I was, had I not 
already received from an aged monk, at Melk, scrolls with verses that as a rule a layman devotes to 
a woman* The monkish vows keep us far from †ho† sink of vice †ha† is †he female body, bu† of†en 
†hey bring us close to other errors. Can I finally hide from myself the fact that even todqy my old 
age is still stirred by †he noondoy demon when my eyes, in choir, happen †o linger on †he beardless 
face of a novice, pure and fresh as a maiden‘s*

I say these things not to cost doubt on the choice I made to devote myself to monastic life, but to 
justify the error of many to whom this holy burden proves heavy. Perhaps to justify Berengar's 
horrible crime. But, according to Benno, this monk apparently pursued his vice in a yet more 
ignoble fashion, using the weapon of extortion to obtain from others what virtue and decorum should 
have advised them agains† giving.

So for some time the monks had been making sarcastic observations on the tender looks Berengar cast 
at Adelmo, who, it seems, was of great comeliness. Whereas Adelmo, enamored only of his work, from 
which he seemed to derive his sole pleasure, paid little attention to Berengar's passion. But 
perhaps— who knows*—he was unaware that his spirit, secretly, tended toward the same ignominy. The 
fact is, Benno said, he had overheard a dialogue between Adelmo and Berengar in which Berengar, 
referring to a secret Adelmo was asking him to reveal, proposed a vile barter, which even the most 
innocent reader can imagine. And it seems that from Adelmo's lips Benno heard words of consent, 
spoken as if with


relief. As if, Benno ventured, Adelmo at heart desired nothing else, qnd it sufficed for him to 
find some excuse other than carnal desire in order to agree. A sign, Benno argued, thot Berengar‘s 
secret must have concerned arcana of learning, so that Adelmo could harbor the illusion of 
submitting to a sin of the flesh to satisfy a desire of the intellect. And, Benno added with a 
smile, how many times had he himself not been stirred by desires of the intellect so violent that 
to satisfy them he would hqve consented to complying with others' carnal desires, even against his 
own inclination.
“Are there not moments,” he asked William, “when you would also do shameful things to get your 
hands
on a book you hove been seeking for years*”

“The wise and most virtuous Sylvester II, centuries ago, gave as a gift a most precious armillary 
sphere in exchange for a manuscript, I believe, of Statius or Lucan,” William soid. He added then, 
prudently, “But it was an armillary sphere, not his virtue.”

Benno odmitted that his enthusiasm had carried him awoy, and he resumed his story. The night before 
Adelmo's death, Benno followed the pair, driven by curiosity, and he sow them, after compline, go 
off
†oge†her †o †he dormitory. He wai†ed q long †ime, holding ajqr †he door of his cell, no† far from 
theirs, ond when silence hod fallen over the sleep of the monks, he clearly saw Adelmo slip into 
Berengar's cell. Benno remained awake, unable to fall asleep, until he heard Berengar‘s door open 
again and Adelmo flee, almost running, as his friend tried to hold him back. Berengar followed 
Adelmo down to the floor below. Cautiously Benno went after them, and at the mouth of the lower 
corridor he saw Berengar, trembling, huddled in o corner, storing a† †he door of Jorge's cell. 
Benno guessed †ha† Adelmo had flung himself at the feet of the venerable brother to confess his 
sin. And Berengar was trembling, knowing his secret was being revealed, even if under the seal of 
the sacrament.

Then Adelmo cqme out, his face pale, thrust awqy Berengar, who was trying to speak to him, and 
rushed out of the dormitory, moving behind the apse of the church and entering the choir from the 
north door (which at night remains open). Probably he wanted to pray. Berengar followed him but did 
not enter the church: he wandered among the graves in the cemetery, wringing his hands.

Benno was wondering wha† to do when he realized †ha† a fourth person was moving abou† the vicinity. 
This person, too, had followed the pair and certainly had not noticed the presence of Benno, who 
flattened himself against the trunk of an oak growing at the edge of the cemetery. The fourth man 
was Venantius. At the sight of him Berengar crouched among the groves, as Venontius also went into 
the choir. At this point, fearing he would be discovered, Benno returned to the dormitory. The next 
morning Adelmo's corpse was found at the foot of the cliff. And more than that, Benno did not know.

Dinner hour was now approaching. Benno left us, and my master osked him noting further. We remained 
for a little while behind the bolneqry, then strolled briefly in the garden, meditating on those 
singulor revelations.

“Frangula,” William said suddenly, bending over to observe a plant that, on that winter day, he 
recognized from the bare bush. “A good infusion is made from the bark, for hemorrhoids. And that is 
arc†ium lappa; a good ca†apIosm of fresh roo†s cica†rizes skin eczemas.”


“You are cleverer than Severinus,” I said to him, “but now tell me whqt you think of what we have 
heard!”

“Dear Adso, you should learn to think with your own head. Benno probably told us the truth. His 
story fits with whctt Berengar told us early this morning, for all its hallucinations. Berengar and 
Adelmo do something very evil together: we had already guessed that. And Berengar must reveal to 
Adelmo thot secret that remains, alas, a secret. Adelmo, after committing his crime against 
chastity and the law of nature, thinks only of confiding in someone who can absolve him, and he 
rushes to Jorge. Whose character is very stern, as we know from experience, and he surely attacks 
Adelmo with distressing reprimands. Perhaps he refuses absolution, perhaps he imposes an impossible 
penance: we don't know, nor would Jorge ever tell us. The fact remains that Adelmo rushes into 
church and prostrotes himself before the altar, but doesn‘t quell his remorse. At this point, he is 
approached by Venantius. We don't know what they soy to each other. Perhaps Adelmo confides in 
Venontius the secret received as a gift (or as payment) from Berengar, which no longer mcttters to 
him, since he now has a far more terrible and burning secret. What happens to Venantius* Perhaps, 
overcome by the same ardent curiosity that today also seized our friend Benno, satisfied with what 
he has learned, he leaves Adelmo to his remorse. Adelmo sees himself abandoned, determines to kill 
himself, comes in despair to the cemetery, and there encounters Berengar. He says terrible words to 
him, flings his responsibilities a† him, calls him his master in turpitude. I believe, actually, 
that Berengar‘s story, stripped of all hallucination, was exact. Adelmo repeats to him the same 
words of desperation he must have heard from Jorge. And now Berengar, overcome, goes off in one 
direction, and Adelmo goes in the other, to kill himself. Then comes the rest, of which we were 
almost witnesses. All believe Adelmo was murdered, so Venantius has the impression that the secret 
of the library is more important than he had believed, and he continues the search on his own. 
Until someone stops him, either before or after he has discovered what he wanted.”
“Who killed him* Berengar*”
“Perhaps. Or Malachi, who must guard the Aedificium. Or someone else. Berengar is suspect becouse 
he is frightened, and he knew thqt by then Venantius possessed his secret. Malqchi is suspect. 
guardian of †he invioIabiIi†y of †he library, he discovers someone has violated i†, and he kills. 
Jorge knows everything about everyone, possesses Adelmo's secret, does not want me to discover what 
Venantius may have found.  Many facts would point to him. But tell me how a blind man can kill
another mon in the fullness of his strength* And how can on old man, even if strong, carry the body 
to the jar* But finally, why couldn‘t the murderer be Benno himself* He could have lied to us, 
impelled by reasons that cannot be confessed. And why limit our suspicions only to those who took 
part in the discussion of laughter* Perhaps the crime had other motives, which have nothing to do 
with the library. In any case, we need two things: to know how to get into the library at night, 
and a lamp. You provide the lamp. Linger in the kitchen at dinner hour, take one. ”
“A theft*”
“A loan, to the greater glory of the Lord.” “If that is so, then count on me.”


“Good. AS for 9e††ing in†o †he Aedificium, we saw where Mctlachi came from las† nigh†. Today I will 
visit the church, and that chapel in particular. In an hour we go to table. Afterward we have a 
meeting with the abbot. You will be admitted, because I have asked to bring a secretary to make a 
note of what we say.”

NONES

In which the abbo† declares his pride in the wealth of his abbey and his fear of heretics, and 
eventually Adso wonders whether he has made a mistake in going forth into the world.

We found the abbot in church, at the main altar. He was following the work of some novices who had 
brought forth from a secret place a number of sacred vessels, chalices, patens, and monstrances, 
and a crucifix I had not seen during the morning function. I could not repress a cry of wonder at 
the dazzling beau†y of †hose holy objects. I† was noon and †he ligh† came in burs†s through †he 
choir windows, and even more through those of the fasade, creating white cascades thot, like mystic 
streams of divine substance, intersected at vctrious points of the church, engulfing the altar 
itself.

The vases, the chalices, each piece revealed its precious materials: amid the yellow of the gold, 
the immaculate white of the ivory, and the transparency of the crystal, I saw gleaming gems of 
every color and dimension, and I recognized jacinth, topqz, ruby, sapphire, emerald, chrysolite, 
onyx, carbuncle, and jasper and ogate. And at the same time I realized how, that morning, first 
transported by prayer and then overcome with terror, I had failed to notice many things: the altar 
frontal and three other panels that flanked it were entirely of gold, and eventually the whole 
altar seemed of gold, from whatever direction I looked ot it.

The abbot smiled at my amazement. “These riches you see,” he said, addressing me and my master, 
“and others you will see later, are the heritage of centuries of piety and devotion, testimony to 
the power and holiness of this abbey. Princes and potentotes of the earth, archbishops and bishops 
have sacrificed to this qltor and to the objects destined for it the rings of their investiture, 
the gold and precious stones that were the emblem of their greatness, to have them melted down here 
to the greater glory of the Lord and of this His place. Though today the abbey is distressed by 
another, sad event, we must not forget, reminded of our fragility, the strength and power of the 
Almighty. The celebration of the Holy Nativity is approaching, and we are beginning to polish the 
sacred vessels, so thot the Saviour's birth mqy be celebrated with all the pomp and magnificence it 
deserves and demands. Everything must appear in its full splendor,” he added, looking hard at 
William, and afterward I understood why he insisted so proudly on justifying his action, “because 
we believe it useful and fitting not to hide, but on the contrary to proclaim divine generosity.”

“Certainly,” William said politely, “if Your Sublimi†y feels †ha† †he Lord mus† be so glorified, 
your abbey has achieved the greatest excellence in this meed of praise.”

“And so it must be,” the abbot said. “If it was the custom that amphoras and phials of gold and 
little gold mortars served, by †he will of God or order of †he prophets, †o collec† †he blood of 
goa†s or calves or of the heifer in the temple of Solomon, then there is all the more reason why 
vases of gold and precious stones, and the most valuable things created, should be used with 
constant reverence and


complete devotion to receive the blood of Christ! If in a second creation our substance were to be 
the some as that of the cherubim and the seraphim, the service it could perform for such an 
ineffable victim would still be unworthy. ”
“Amen,” I said.
“Many protest that a devoutly inspired mind, a pure heart, a will led by faith should suffice for 
this sacred function. We are the first to declare explicitly and resolutely that these are the 
essential things; but we are convinced thot homage must also be paid through the exterior ornament 
of the sacred vessel, because it is profoundly right and fitting that we serve our Saviour in all 
things, totally. He who has not refused to provide for us, totally and without reservation.”

“This has always been the opinion of the great men of your order,” William agreed, “and I recall 
beautiful things written on the ornaments of churches by the very great and venerable abbot Su9er.”
“True,” the abbot said. “You see this crucifix. It is not yet complete. ” He took it in his hand 
with
infinite love, gazed qt it, his face radiant with bliss. “Some pearls are still missing here, for I 
hqve found none the right size. Once Saint Andrew oddressed the cross of Golgotha, saying it was 
adorned with the limbs of Christ as with pearls. And pearls must adorn this humble simulacrum of 
that great wonder. Still, I have found it proper to set, here, over the very head of the Saviour, 
the most beautiful diamond you will ever see.” His devout hqnds, his long white fingers, stroked 
the most precious par†s of †he sacred wood, or, ro†her, †he. socred ivory, for †his noble material 
hod served †o form the arms of the cross.

“As I take pleasure in all the beauties of this house of God, when the spell of the many-colored 
stones frets torn me from outside concerns and a worthy meditation has led me to reflect, 
transferring that which is material to that which is immaterial, on the diversity of the sacred 
virtues, then I seem to find myself, so to speak, in a strange region of the universe, no longer 
completely enclosed in the mire of the earth or completely free in the purity of heaven. And it 
seems to me that, by the grace of God, I can be transported from this lower world to that higher 
world by onctgoge.  ”

As he spoke, he turned his face to the nave. A shaft of light from above was illuminating his 
countenance, through a special benevolence of the daystar, and his hands, which he had extended in
†he form of a cross, caugh† up as he was in his fervor. “Every creature,” he soid, “visible or 
invisible, is a light, brought into being by the father of Ii9hts.This ivory, this onyx, but also 
the stone thqt surrounds us, are a light, because I perceive that they are good and beautiful, that 
they exist according to their own rules of proportion, that they differ in genus and species from 
all other genera and species, that they are defined by their own number, that they are true to 
their order, that they seek their specific place according to their weight. And the more these 
things are revealed to me, the more the matter I gaze on is by its nature precious, and the better 
illuminated is the divine power of creation, for if I must strive to rasp the sublimity of the 
cause, inaccessible in its fullness, through the sublimity of the effect, how much better am I told 
of the divine causality by an effect as wondrous as gold and diamond, if even dung or an insect can 
speak to me of it! And then, when I perceive in these stones such superior things, the soul weeps, 
moved to joy, and not through terrestrial vanity or love of riches, but through the purest love of 
the prime, uncaused cause.”


“Truly this is the sweetest of theologies,” William said, with perfect humility, and I thought he 
was using that insidious figure of speech that rhetors call irony, which must alwoys be prefaced by 
the pronunciatio, representing its signal and its justification—something William never did. For 
which reason the abbot, more inclined to the use of figures of speech, took William literally and 
added, still in the power of his mystical transport, “It is the most immediate of the paths thqt 
put us in touch with the Almighty: theophanic matter.”

William coughed politely. “Er ... hm ...” he said. This is what he did when he wanted to introduce 
a new subjec†. He managed †o do i† gracefully becouse i† wos his habi†—and I believe †his is 
†ypicoI of †he men of his country—to begin every remark with long preliminary moans, as if starting 
the exposition of a completed thought cost him a great mental effort. Whereas, I am now convinced, 
the more groans he uttered before his decloration, the surer he was of the soundness of the 
proposition he was expressing.
“Eh ... oh ...” William continued. “We should talk of the meeting and the debate on poverty.”

“Poverty ...” †he qbbo† said, s†ilI los† in †hough†, as if hqving a hard †ime coming down from †ha† 
beautiful region of the universe to which his gems had tronsported him. “Ah, yes, the meeting ...”

And they began an intense discussion of things that in part I already knew and in part I managed to 
grasp as I listened to their tqlk. As I said at the beginning of this faithful chronicle, it 
concerned the double quarrel that had set, on the one hand, the Emperor against the Pope, and, on 
the other, the Pope against the Franciscans, who in the Peru9ia chapter, though only after many 
years, had espoused the Spirituals' theories about the poverty of Christ; and it concerned the 
jumble that had been created as the Franciscans sided with the empire, a triangle of oppositions 
and alliances that had now been transformed in†o q square, †hanks †o †he in†erven†ion, †o me s†iII 
very obscure, of †he abbo†s of the order of Saint Benedict.
I never clearly grasped the reason why the Benedictine abbots had given refuge and protection to 
the Spiritual Franciscans, some †ime before †heir own order cqme †o share †heir opinions †o a 
cer†ctin ex†en†. Because if †he Spiri†uals preached †he renunciation of all worldly goods, †he 
abbo†s of my order—I had seen that very day the radiant confirmation—followed a path no less 
virtuous, though exactly the opposite. But I believe the abbots felt that excessive power for the 
Pope meant excessive power for the bishops and the cities, whereas my order had retained its power 
intact through the centuries precisely by opposing the secular clergy and the city merchants, 
setting itself as direct mediator between earth and heaven, and as adviser of sovereigns.
I had often heard repeated the motto according to which the people of God were divided into 
shepherds (namely, the clerics), dogs (thctt is, warriors), and sheep (the populace). But I later 
learned thot this sentence can be rephrased in several ways. The Benedictines had often spoken, not 
of three orders, but of two great divisions, one involving the administration of earthly things and 
the other the administration of heavenly things. As far as earthly things went, there was a valid 
division into clergy, lay lords, and populace, bu† this tripartite division was dominated by the 
presence of the ordo monachorum, direct link between God's people and heaven, and the monks had no 
connection with those secular shepherds, the priests and bishops, ignorant and corrupt, now supine 
before the interests of the cities, where the sheep were no longer the good and faithful peasants 
but, rather, the merchants


and artisans. The Benedictine order was not sorry that the governing of the simple should be 
entrusted to the seculor clerics, provided it was the monks who established the definitive 
regulotion of this government, the monks being in direct contact with the source of all earthly 
power, the empire, just as they were with the source of all heavenly power. This, I believe, is why 
many
Benedictine abbots, to restore dignity to the empire against the government of the cities (bishops 
and merchants united), agreed to protect the Spiritual Franciscans, whose ideas they did not share 
but whose presence was useful to them, since it offered the empire good syllogisms against the 
overweening power of the Pope.

These were the reasons, I then deduced, why Abo was now preparing to collaborate with William, the 
Emperor's envoy, and to act as mediator between the Franciscan order and the papal throne. In fact, 
even in the violence of the dispute that so endangered the unity of the church, Michael of Ceseno, 
several times called to Avignon by Pope John, was ultimately prepared to accept the invitation, 
because he did not want his order to place itself in irrevocable conflict with the Pontiff. As 
general of
†he Franciscans, he wan†ed a† once †o see †heir positions triumph and †o ob†ain papal assen†, no† 
leas† because he surmised thot without the Pope‘s agreement he would not be able to remain for long 
at the head of the order.
Bu† many had assured him †he Pope would be awaiting him in France †o ensnare him, charge him wi†h 
heresy, and bring him to trial. Therefore, they advised that Michael's appearance at Avignon should 
be preceded by negotiations. Mqrsilius had hqd a better idea: to send with Michael qn imperial 
envoy who would presen† †o †he Pope †he poin† of view of †he Emperor's supporters. No† so much †o 
convince old Cahors but to strengthen the position of Michael, who, as part of an imperial 
legation, would not then be such easy prey to papal vengeance.

This idea, however, hctd numerous disadvantctges ctnd, could not be carried out immediately. Hence 
the idea of a preliminary meeting between the imperial legation and some envoys of the Pope, to 
essay their respective positions and to draw up the agreement for a further encounter at which the 
safety of the Italian visitors would be guaranteed. To organize this first meeting, William of 
Baskerville had been appointed. Later, he would present the imperial theologians' point of view at 
Avignon, if he deemed †he journey possible wi†hou† danger. A far-from-simple enterprise, because i† 
was supposed that the Pope, who wanted Michael alone in order to be able to reduce him more readily 
to obedience, would send to Italy a mission with instructions to make the planned journey of the 
imperial envoys to his court a failure, as for as possible. William had acted till now with great 
ability. After long consultations with vctrious Benedictine abbots (this was the reason for the 
many stops along our journey), he had chosen the abbey where we now were, precisely because the 
abbot was known to be devoted to the empire and yet, through his great diplomatic skill, not 
disliked by the papal court.
Neutral territory, therefore, this abbey where the two groups could meet.
But the Pope's resistance was not exhausted. He knew that, once his legation was on the abbey‘s 
terrain, it would be subject to the abbot‘s jurisdiction; and since some of his envoys belonged to 
the secular clergy, he would no† accep† †his control, claiming fears of an imperial plo†. He had 
therefore made the condition that his envoys' safety be entrusted to a company of archers of the 
King of France, under the command of a person in the Pope's trust. I had vaguely listened as 
William discussed this with an ambassador of the Pope at Bobbio: it was a matter of defining the 
formula to prescribe the duties of this company—or, rather, defining what was meant by the 
guaranteeing of the safety of


the papal legates. A formula proposed by the Avignonese had finally been accepted, for it seemed 
reasonable: the armed men and their officers would have jurisdiction “over all those who in any way 
made an attempt on the life of members of the papal delegation or tried to influence their behavior 
or judgment by acts of violence.” Then the pact had seemed inspired by purely formal 
preoccupations.
Now, after the recent events at the abbey, the abbot wqs uneasy, and he revealed his doubts to 
William. If the legation arrived at the abbey while the author of the two crimes was still unknown 
(and the following day the abbot's worries were to increase, because the crimes would increase to 
three), they would have to confess that within those walls someone in circulation was capable of 
influencing the judgment and behavior of the papal envoys with acts of violence.
Trying to conceal the crimes committed would be of no avail, because if anything further were to 
happen, the papal envoys would suspect a plot against them. And so there were only two solutions. 
Either Williom discovered the murderer before the arrival of the legotion (and here the abbot 
stored hard at him as if silently reproaching him for not having resolved the matter yet) or else 
the Pope's envoy had †o be informed frankly and his collaboration sough†, †o place †he abbey under 
close surveillance during the course of the discussions. The abbot did not like this second 
solution, because it meant renouncing: part of his sovereignty qnd submitting his own monks to 
French control. But he could run no risks. Williom and †he obbo† were bo†h vexed by †he †urn †hings 
were †aking; however, they had few choices. They proposed, therefore, to come to a final decision 
during the next day.
Meanwhile, they could only entrust themselves to divine mercy and to William's sagacity.

“I will do everything possible, Your Sublimity,” William said. “But, on the other hand, I foil to 
see how the matter can really compromise the meeting. Even the papal envoy will understand that 
there is a difference between the act of a madman or a sanguinary, or perhaps only of a lost soul, 
and the grave proems that upright men will meet to discuss.”

“You think so*” the abbot asked, looking hard at William. “Remember: the Avignonese know they are 
to meet Minorites, and therefore very dangerous persons, close to the Fraticelli and others even 
more demented than the Fraticelli, dangerous heretics who ore stained with crimes“—here the abbot 
lowered his voice—"compared with which the events that have tctken place here, horrible cts they 
ctre, pole like mist in the sun.”

“It is not the same thing!” William cried sharply. “You cannot put the Minorites of the Perugia 
chapter on the same level as some bonds of heretics who hove misunderstood the message of the 
Gospel, transforming the strUg9!e against riches into a series of private vendettas or bloodthirsty 
follies. ”
“It is not many years since, not many miles from here, one of those bands, as you call them, put to 
fire and †he sword †he es†a†es of †he Bishop of Vercelli ond †he moun†oins beyond Novora,” †he 
abbo† said curtly.

“You speak of Fra Dolcino and †he Apostles. ”

“The Pseudo Apostles,” the abbot corrected him. And once more I heard Fro Dolcino and the Pseudo 
Apostles mentioned, and once more in o circumspect tone, with almost a hint of terror.

“The Pseudo Apostles,” William readily agreed. “But they had no connection with the Minorites. ”




"... wi†h whom †hey shared †he same professed reverence for Joachim of Calobria,“ †he abbo†
persisted, “and you can ask your brother Ubertino.“

“I mus† poin† ou† †o Your 5ubIimi†y †ha† now he is a brother of your own order,” William said, wi†h 
a smile and a kind of bow, as if †o complimen† †he abbo† on †he gain his order had made by 
receiving a man of such renown.

“I know, I know.“ The abbot smiled. "And you know with what fraternal core our order welcomed the 
Spirituals when they incurred the Pope‘s wrath. I am not speaking only of Ubertino, but also of 
many o†her, more humble brothers, of whom li††Ie is known, and of whom perhaps we should know more.
Because it has happened that we accepted fugitives who presented themselves gorbed in the habit of 
the Minorites, and afterward I learned that the various vicissitudes of their life had brought 
them, for a time, quite close to the Dolcinians.  “
"Here, too*" William asked.

"Here, too. I am revealing to you something about which, to tell the truth, I know very little, and 
in any case not enough to pronounce accusations. But inasmuch as you are investigating the life of 
this abbey, it is best for you to know these things also. I will tell you, further, that on the 
basis of things I have heard or surmised, I suspect—mind you, only suspect—that there was a very 
dark moment to the life of our cellarer, who orrived here, in foc†, †wo years ogo, following †he 
exodus of †he Minori†es.”

"The cellarer* Remigio of Varagine a Dolcinian* He seems to me the mildest of creatures, and, for 
thot matter, the least interested in Sister Poverty that I have ever seen ” William said.

"I can say nothing agoinst him, and I make use of his good services, for which the whole community 
is also grateful to him. But I mention this to make you understand how easy it is to find 
connections between o frior of ours and a Fra†icello.”

"Once ogain your mognonimi†y is misplaced, if I may soy so,” William in†erjec†ed. "We were talking 
abou† Dolcinians, no† Fra†icelli. And much can be said abou† †he Dolcinians wi†hou† anyone's really 
knowing who is being discussed, because there are many kinds. Still, they cannot be called 
sanguinary. At most they can be reproached for putting into practice without much consideration 
things thot the Spirituals preached with greater temperance, animated by true love of God, and here 
I qgree the borderline between one group and the other is very fine.  “

“But the Fraticelli are heretics!“ the abbot interrupted sharply. "They do not confine themselves 
to sustainin9 the poverty of Christ and the apostles, a doctrine that—thou9h I cannot bring myself 
to share it—can be usefully opposed to the haughtiness of Avignon. The Fraticelli derive from thot
doctrine a practical syllogism: they infer a right to revolution, to looting, to the perversion of 
behavior.“
"But which Froticelli*”


“All, in general. You know they are stained with unmentionable crimes, they do not recognize 
ma†rimony, †hey deny hell, †hey commi† sodomy, †hey embrace †he Bogomil heresy of †he ordo 
Bulgariae and the ordo Drygonthie. “

"Please,” William said, "do not mix things that are separate! You speak as if the Fraticelli, 
Patarines, Waldensians, Catharists, and within these the Bogomils of Bulgaria and the heretics of 
Dragovitsa, were all the same thing!”

"They are,” †he abbo† said sharply, "†hey are because †hey ore heretics, and †hey ore because †hey 
jeopardize the very order of the civilized world, as well as the order of the empire you seem to me 
to favor. A hundred or more years ago the followers of Arnold of Brescia se† fire to the houses of 
the nobles and the cardinals, and these were the fruits of the Lombard heresy of the Patarines.“

"Abo," William said, “you live in the isolation of this splendid and holy abbey, far from the 
wickedness of the world. Life in the cities is far more complex than you believe, and there are 
degrees, you know, also in error and in evil. Lot was much less a sinner than his fellow citizens 
who conceived foul
†hough†s also abou† †he angels sen† by God, and †he betrayal of Pe†er was nothing compared wi†h †he 
betrayal of Judas: one, indeed, was forgiven, †he o†her no†. You canno† consider Patarines and 
Catharists the same thing. The Patarines were a movement to reform behavior within the laws of Holy 
Mother Church. They wanted always to improve the ecclesiastics’ behavior.“
"Maintaining that the sacraments should not be received from impure priests “
"And they were mistaken, but it was their only error of doctrine. They never proposed to alter the 
law of God. “

"Bu† the Po†arine preaching of Arnold of Brescia, in Rome, more than two hundred years ago, drove
†he mob of rus†ics †o burn †he houses of †he nobles and †he cardinals.”

“Arnold tried to drqw the mqgistrqtes of the city into his reform movement. They did not follow 
him, and he found support among the crowds of the poor and the outcost. He was not responsible for 
the violence and the anger with which they responded to his appeals for a less corrupt city.“
“The city is always corrupt.”
“The city is the place where today live the people of God, of whom you, we, are the shepherds. It 
is the place of scandal in which the rich prelates preach virtue to poor and hungry people. The 
Patarine disorders were born of this situation. They ore sod, but not incomprehensible. The 
Catharists ore something else. That is an Oriental heresy, outside the doctrine of the church. I 
don‘t know whether
†hey really commi† or have commi††ed †he crimes o††ribu†ed †o †hem. I know †hey rejec† ma†rimony, 
they deny hell. I wonder whether many acts they have not committed have been attributed to them 
only because of the ideas (surely unspeakable) they have upheld.”

"And you tell me that the Catharists have not mingled with the Patarines, and that both are not 
simply two of the faces, the countless faces, of the same demoniacal phenomenon*“


“I scty that many of these heresies, independently of the doctrines they assert, encounter success 
among the simple because they suggest to such people the possibility of a different life. I soy 
that very often the simple do not know much about doctrine. I say that often hordes of simple 
people have confused Catharist preaching with that of the Patarines, and these together with that 
of the Spirituals. The life of the simple, Abo, is not illuminated by learning and by the lively 
sense of distinctions †ho† makes us wise. And i† is haunted by illness and poverty, tongue-tied by 
ignorance.
Joining a heretical group, for many of them, is often only another way of shouting their own 
despair. You may burn a cardinal's house because you want to perfect the life of the clergy, but 
also because you believe that the hell he preaches does not exist. It is always done because on 
earth there does exist a hell, where lives the flock whose shepherds we no longer are. But you know 
very well that, just as they do not distinguish between the Bulgarian church and the followers of 
the priest Liprando, so often the imperial authorities and their supporters did not distinguish 
between Spirituals and heretics. No† infrequently, imperial forces, to comba† their adversaries, 
encouraged Ca†haris† tendencies among the populace. In my opinion they acted wrongly. But what I 
now know is that the same forces often, to rid themselves of these restless and dangerous and too 
‘simple’ adversaries, attributed to one group the heresies of the others, and flung them all on the 
pyre. I have seen—I swectr †o you, Abo, I hctve seen wi†h my own eyes—men of virtuous life, sincere 
followers of poverty and chastity, but enemies of the bishops, whom the bishops thrust into the 
hands of the secular arm, whether it was in the service of the empire or of the free cities, 
accusing these men of sexual promiscuity, sodomy, unspeakable practices—of which others, perhaps, 
but not they, had been guilty. The simple are meat for slaughter, to be used when they are useful 
in causing trouble for the opposing power, and to be sacrificed when they are no longer of use.”

“Therefore,” the abbot said, with obvious maliciousness, “were Fra Dolcino and his madmen, and 
Gherardo Segarelli and those evil murderers, wicked Catharists or virtuous Fraticelli, sodomite 
Bogomils or Patarine reformers* Will you tell me, William, you who know so much about heretics thqt 
you seem one of them, where the truth lies*”

“Nowhere, a† times,” William soid, sadly.

“You see* You yourself can no longer distinguish between one heretic and another. I at least hove a 
rule. I know that heretics are those who endanger the order that sustains the people of God. And I 
defend the empire because it guarantees this order for me. I combat the Pope because he is handing 
the spiritual power over to the bishops of the cities, who are allied with the merchants and the 
corporations and will not be able to maintain this order. We have maintained it for centuries. And 
as for the heretics, I also have a rule, and it is summed up in the reply that Arnald Amalaricus, 
Bishop of Citeaux, gave to those who asked him what to do with the citizens of Béziers: Kill them 
all, God will recognize His own.”

William lowered his eyes and remained silent for a while. Then he said, “The city of Béziers was 
captured and our forces had no regard for dignity of sex or age, and almost twenty thousand people 
were put to the sword. When the massacre was complete, the city was sacked and burned.”
“A holy war is nevertheless a war.”


“For this reqson perhaps there should not be holy wars. But what am I saying* I am here to defend 
the rights of Louis, who is olso putting Italy to the sword. I, too, find myself caught in a game 
of strange alliances. Strange the alliance between Spirituals and the empire, and strange that of 
the empire with Marsilius, who seeks sovereignty for the people. And strange the alliance between 
the two of us, so different in our ideas qnd traditions. But we have two tasks in common: the 
success of the meeting and the discovery of a murderer. Let us try to proceed in peace.”

The abbot held out his arms. “Give me the kiss of peace, Brother William. With a man of your 
knowledge I could argue endlessly obout fine points of theology and morals. We must not give way, 
however, to the pleasure of disputation, as the masters of Paris do. You are right: we have an 
important task ohead of us, and we must proceed in agreement. But I have spoken of these things 
because I believe there is a connection. Do you understand* A possible connection—or, rather, a 
connection others can moke—between the crimes that have occurred here and the theses. of your 
brothers. This is why I have warned you, and this is why we must ward off every suspicion or 
insinuation on the part of the Avignonese.”
“Am I not qlso to suppose Your Sublimity hqs suggested to me q line for my inquiry* Do you believe
†ho† †he source of †he recen† even†s can be found in some obscure s†ory da†ing back †o †he 
heretical past of one of the monks*”

The abbot was silent for a few moments, looking at William but allowing no expression to be rectd 
on his face. Then he said: “In this sad affair you ore the inquisitor. It is your task to be 
suspicious, even to risk unjust suspicion. Here I am only the general father. And, I will add, if I 
knew that the past of one of my monks lent itself to well-founded suspicion, I would myself already 
have taken care to uproot the unhealthy plant. What I know, you know. What I do not know should 
properly be brought to light by your wisdom.” He nodded to us and left the church.
“The story is becoming more complicated, dear Adso,” William said, frowning. We pursue a 
manuscript, we become interested in the” diatribes of some overcurious monks and in the actions of 
other, overlustful ones, and now, more and more insistently, an entirely different trctil emerges. 
The cellorer, then ... And with the cellarer that strange animal Salvatore also arrived here. . . 
But now we must go and rest, because we plan to stay awake during the night.”

“Then you still mean to enter the library †onigh†* You are no† going to abandon †ha† firs† trail*”

“Not at all. Anyway, who says the two trails are separate* And finally, this business of the 
cellarer could merely be a suspicion of †he abbo†’s.”

He started towctrd the p !9^' s’ hospice. On reaching the threshold, he stopped and spoke, as if 
continuing his earlier remarks.

“After all, the abbot asked me to investigate Adelmo's death when he thought that something 
unheolthy was going on omong his young monks. But now that the death of Venantius arouses other 
suspicions, perhaps the abbot has sensed that the key to the mystery lies in the library, and there 
he does not wish any investigating. So he offers me the suggestion of the cellarer, to distract my 
attention from the Aedificium.  ”



“Bu† why would he no† wan†—”

“Don’† ask †oo many questions. The abbo† †old me a† †he beginning †ha† †he library was no† †o be 
touched. He must have his own good reasons. It could be that he is involved in some matter he 
thought unrelated to Adelmo's death, and now he realizes the scandal is spreading and could olso 
touch him.
And he doesn't want the truth to be discovered, or at least he doesn't want me to be the one who 
discovers it. ”

“Then we are livin9if'Ia place abandoned by God,” I said, disheartened.
“Have you found any places where God would have felt at home*” William asked me, looking down from 
his great height.

Then he sent me to rest. As I lay on my pallet, I concluded that my father should not have sent me 
out into the world, which was more complicated than I had thought. I was learning too many things.

“Salva me ab ore leonis,” I prayed as I fell asleep.

AFTER VESPERS
In which, though the chapter is short, old Alinardo says very interesting things about the 
labyrinth and abou† †he way †o en†er i†.

I woke when it was almost tolling the hour for the evening meql. I felt dull and somnolent, for 
daytime sleep is like the sin of the flesh: the more you have the more you wont, and yet you feel 
unhappy,. sated and unsated at the same time. William was not to his cell; obviously he had risen 
much earlier. I found him, after a brief search, coming out of the Aedificium. He told me he had 
been in the scriptorium, leafing through the catalogue qnd observing the monks qt work, while 
trying to approach Venontius's desk and resume his inspection. But for one reason or another, each 
monk seemed bent on keeping him from searching among those papers. First Malachi had come over to 
him, to show him some precious illuminations. Then Benno had kept him busy on trifling pretexts. 
Still later, when he had bent over to resume his examination, Berengar hod begun hovering around 
him, offering his collaboration.

Finally, seeing that my master appeared seriously determined to look into Venantius‘s things, 
Malachi told him outright that, before rummaging among the dead man's papers, he ought perhaps to 
obtain the abbot‘s authorization; that he himself, even though he was the librarian, had refrained, 
out of respect and discipline, from looking; and that in any cqse, as William had requested, no one 
had approached that desk, and no one would approach it until the abbot gave instructions. William 
realized it was not worth engaging in a test of strength with Malachi, though all that stir and 
those fears about Venantius's papers had of course increased his desire to become acquainted with 
them. But he was so determined to get back in there thot night, though he still did not know how, 
that he decided no† †o creo†e incidents. He was harboring, however, †hough†s of re†oIio†ion, which, 
if †hey had no† been inspired as they were by a thirst for truth, would have seemed very stubborn 
and perhaps reprehensible.



Before entering the refectory, we took another little walk in the cloister, to dispel the mists of 
sleep in the cold evening air. Some monks were still walking there in meditation. In the garden 
opening off
†he cloister we glimpsed old Alinardo of Gro††aferra†a, who, by now feeble of body, spen† a grea† 
par† of his day among the trees, when he was not in church praying; He seemed not to feel the cold, 
and he was sitting in the outer porch.

William spoke a few words of greeting to him, and the old man seemed happy that someone should 
spend time with him.

"A peaceful day,” William said.
“By the grace of God,” the old man answered.
"Peaceful in the heavens, but grim on earth. Did you know Venantius well*“

"Venantius who*” the old man said. Then q light flashed in his eyes. "Ah, the dead boy. The beqst 
is roaming abou† †he abbey. . “

"What beast*”

"The great beast that comes from the sea ... Seven heods and ten horns and upon his horns ten 
crowns and upon his heads three names of blasphemy. The beast like unto a leopard, with the feet of 
a bear, and the mouth of a lion ... I have seen him.”

“Where have you seen him* In the library*"

“Library* Why there* I have not gone to the scriptorium for years and I have never seen the 
library. No one goes to the library. I knew those who did go up to the library. ”

"Who* Molochi* Berengar*"

"Oh, no ...” the old man said, chuckling. "Before. The librarian who came before Malachi, many 
years
ago ”

"Who was that*"

“I do not remember; he died when Malachi wos still young. And the one who came before Malachi‘s 
master, and was a young assistant librarian when I wqs young  But I never set foot in the library.
Lobyrin†h . .“

"The library is a labyrinth*”

"Hunc mundum tipice labyrinthus denotat ille,” the old man recited, absently. "Intranti lorgus, 
redeunti sed nimis ar†us. The library is a grea† labyrinth, sign of †he labyrinth of †he world. You 
en†er and you do not know whether you will come out. You must not transgress the pillars of 
Hercules.  “




“So you don’† know how one en†ers †he library when †he Aedificium doors ore closed*”

“Oh, yes.” The old man laughed. “Many know. You go by way of the ossarium. You can go through the 
ossarium, but you do not want to go through the ossarium. The dead monks keep watch.”

“Those dead monks who keep watch—they are not those who move at night through the library with a 
lamp*”

“With a lamp*” The old man seemed amazed. “I have never heard this story. The dead monks stay in 
the ossarium, the bones drop gradually from the cemetery and collect there, to guard the passoge. 
Have you never seen the altar of the chapel that leads to the ossarium*”

“It is the third on the left, after the transept, is it not*”

The third* Perhaps. It is the one whose altar stone is carved with a thousand skeletons. The fourth 
skull on the right: press the eyes ... qnd you qre in the ossarium. But do not go there: I hqve 
never gone. The abbo† does no† wish i†.”

“And the beast* Where did you see the beast*”

“The beas†* Ah, †he An†ichris† ... He is abou† †o come, †he millennium is pos†; we awai† him. ”

“But the millennium was three hundred years ago, and he did not come then. ”

“The Antichrist does not come after q thousand eqrs have passed. When the thousand years have 
possed, the reign of the just begins; then comes the Antichrist, to confound the just, and then 
there will be †he final ba††Ie.  ”

“But the just will reign for a thousand yeqrs,” William said. “Or else they reigned from the death 
of Christ to the end of the first millennium, and so the Antichrist should hove come then; or else 
the just have not yet reigned, and the Antichrist is still far off.”

“The millennium is not calculated from the death of Christ but from the donation of Constantine, 
three centuries later. Now it is a thousand years. ”

“So the rein of the just is ending*”
“I do not know. ... I do not know ctny more. I am tired. The calculation is difficult. Beatus of 
Liébana
made it; ask Jorge, he is young, he remembers well.  But the time is ripe. Did you not hear the 
seven
trumpets*”
“Why the seven trumpets*”

“Did you not hear how the other boy died, the illuminator* The first angel sounded the first 
trumpet, and hail and fire fell mingled with blood. And the second angel sounded the second 
trumpet, and the


third part of the sea became blood.  Did the second boy not die in the sea of blood* Watch out for
the third trumpet! The third part of the creotures in the sea will die. God punishes us. The world 
all around the abbey is rank with heresy; they tell me that on the throne of Rome there is a 
perverse pope who uses hosts for practices of necromancy, and feeds them to his morays.  And in our 
midst
someone has violated the ban, has broken the seals of the labyrinth. ”
“Who told you that*“
“I heard it. All were whispering that sin has entered the abbey. Do you hove any chickpeas*” The 
question, addressed to me, surprised me. "No, I have no chickpeas,” I said, confused.
“Next time, bring me some chickpeos. I hold them in my mouth—you see my poor toothless mouth*— 
until they are soft. They stimulate saliva, aqua Ions vitae. Will you bring me some chickpeas

“Tomorrow I will bring you some chickpeas,” I said to him. But he had dozed off. We left him and 
went
†o †he refectory.


COMPLINE
In which the Aedificium is entered, a mysterious visitor is discovered, a secret message with 
necromantic signs is found, and also a book is found, but then promptly vanishes, to be sought 
through many subsequent chapters; nor is the theft of William's precious lenses the last of the 
vicissitudes.

The supper was joyless and silen†. I† had been jus† over †weIve ours since †he discovery of 
Venan†ius’s co r se. All the others stole glimpses at his empty place at table. When it was the 
hour for compline, the procession that marched into the choir seemed a funeral cortége. We followed 
the office stonding in the nqve and keeping an eye on the third chapel. The light was scqnt, and 
when we sqw Malachi emerge from the darkness to reach his stall, we could not tell exactly where he 
had come from. We moved into the shadows, hiding in the side nave, so that no one would see us stay 
behind when the office was over. Under my scapular I had the lamp I had purloined in the kitchen 
during supper. We would light it later at the great bronze tripod that burned all night. I had 
procured a new wick and ample oil. We would have light for a long time.

I was too excited about our imminent venture to pay attention to the service, which ended almost 
without my noticing. The monks lowered their cowls over their faces and slowly filed out, to go to 
their cells. The church remained deserted, illuminated by the glow of the tripod.

"Now,” William said, "†o work."

We opproached the third chapel. The base of the altar was reolly like an ossarium, a series of 
skulls with deep hollow eyesockets, which filled those who looked at them with terror, set on a 
pile of what, in the admirable relief, appeared to be tibias. William repeated in a low voice the 
words he had heard from Alinardo (fourth skull on the right, press the eyes). He stuck his fingers 
into the sockets of that


fleshless face, and qt once we heard a kind of hoarse creak. The altar moved, turning on a hidden 
pivot, allowing a glimpse of a dark aperture. As I shed light on it with my raised lamp, we made 
out some damp steps. We decided to go down them, after debating whether to close off the passage 
again behind us. Better not, William said: we did not know whether we would be able to reopen it 
afterward. And qs for the risk of being discovered, if anyone cctme at that hour to operate the 
sqme mechanism,
†ho† mean† he knew how to enter, and a closed passage would no† deter him.
We descended perhaps a dozen steps and came into a corridor on whose sides there were some 
horizontal niches, such as I was Ia†er †o see in many ca†ocombs. gu† now I was entering an ossorium 
for the first time, and I was very much afraid. The monks' bones had been collected there over the 
centuries, dug from the earth and piled in the niches with no attempt to decompose the forms of 
their bodies. Some niches had only tiny bones, others only skulls, neatly arranged in a kind of 
pyramid, so thot one would not roll over another; and it was a truly terrifying sight, especially 
in the ploy of shadows the lamp created as we walked on. In one niche I saw only hands, many hands, 
now irrevocably interlaced in a tangle of dead fingers. I let out a cry in thot place of the dead, 
for a moment sensing some presence above, a squeaking, a rapid movement in the dark.
“Mice,” William soid, to reassure me. “What are mice doing here*”
“Passing through, like us: because the ossarium leads to the Aedificium, and then to the kitchen. 
And to the tasty books of the library. And now you understand why Malachi‘s face is so austere. His 
duties oblige him to come through here twice daily, morning and evening. Truly he has nothing to 
laugh about.”
“But why doesn‘t the Gospel ever scty that Christ Ictughed*” I asked, for no good rectson. “Is 
Jorge

“Legions of scholors have wondered whether Christ laughed. The question doesn't interest me much. I 
believe he never laughed, because, omniscient as the son of God hqd to be, he knew how we 
Christians would behave. But here we are.”

And, in fact, the corridor was ending, thank God: new steps began. After climbing them, we would 
have only to push an ironclad wooden door and we would find ourselves behind the fireplace of the 
kitchen, just below the circular staircase leading to the scriptorium. As we went up, we thou9ht we 
heard a noise above us.
We remained a moment in silence; then I said, “It's impossible. No one came in before us. ”
“Assuming this is the only woy into the Aedificium. In centuries past this was a fortress, and it 
must have more secret entrances than we know of. We‘ll go up slowly. But we have little choice. If 
we put out the light we can't see where we are going; if we leave it burning we. give anyone 
upstairs the alarm. Our only hope is thot if someone reolly is there, he will be afraid of us.”

We reached the scriptorium, emerging from the south tower. Venantius's desk was directly opposite. 
The room was so vast that, as we moved, we illuminated only a few yards of wall at a time. We hoped


no one was in the court, to see the light through the windows. The desk appeared to be in order, 
but William bent at once to examine the pages on the shelf below, and he cried out in dismay.

"Is something missing*” I asked.

"Todoy I saw †wo books here, one of †hem in Greek. And †ha†’s †he one missing. Somebody has †aken 
it, and in great haste, because one page fell on the floor here.”

“But the desk was watched. ”

"Of course. Perhaps somebody grobbed it just a short while ago. Perhops he's still here.“ He turned 
toward the shadows and his voice echoed omong the columns. “If you are here, beware!” It seemed to 
me a good ideo os William hod said before, it is always better when the person who frightens us is 
also afraid of us.

William set down the page he had found under the desk and bent his face toward it. He osked me for 
more light. I held the lamp closer qnd saw q page, the first hqlf of it blank, the second covered 
with tiny characters whose origin I recognized with some difficulty.

"Is it Greek*” I asked.

"Yes, but I don't understand clearly.” He took his lenses from his habit and set them firmly 
astride his nose, then bent his head again.

“It's Greek, written in a very fine hand, and yet in a disorderly way. Even with my lenses I hove 
trouble reading it. I need still more light. Come closer. ”

He had picked up the sheet of parchment, holding it to his face; and instead of stepping behind him 
and holding the lamp high over his head, I foolishly stood directly in front of him. He osked me to 
move aside, qnd qs I did, I grqzed the back of the page with the flqme. William pushed me qway, 
asking me whether I wanted to burn the manuscrip† for him. Then he cried ou†. I sow clearly †ha† 
some vague signs, in a yellow-brown color, had appeared on the upper part of the page. William made 
me give him the lamp and moved it behind the page, holding the flame fairly close to the surface of 
the parchment, which he heated without setting it ofire. Slowly, as if an invisible hand were 
writing "Mane, Tekel, Peres," I saw some marks emerge one by one on the white side of the sheet as 
William moved the lamp, and as the smoke that rose from the top of the flame blackened the recto; 
the marks did not resemble those of any alphabet, except that of necromancers.

"Fantastic!” William sqid. “More and more interesting!” He looked qround. “But it would be better 
not to expose this discovery to the tricks of our mysterious companion, if he is still here. “ He 
took off
his lenses, set them on the desk, then carefully rolled up the parchment and hid it inside his 
habit. S†ill amazed by †his sequence of even†s, which were nothing if no† miraculous, I was abou† 
†o ask further explanations when all of a sudden a sharp sound distracted us. It came from the foot 
of the east stairway, leading to the library.


“Our man is there! After him!” William shouted, and we flung ourselves in that direction, he moving 
fas†er, I more slowly, for I was carrying †he lamp. I heard †he cIa††er of someone stumbling ond 
falling. I ran, and found William at the foot of the steps, observing a heavy volume, its binding 
reinforced with metal studs. At that same moment we heard another noise, in the direction from 
which we had come. “Fool that I am!” William cried. “Hurry! To Venantius's desk!”

I understood: somebody, from the shadows behind us, had thrown the volume to send us far away.

Once again William was faster thon I and reached the desk first. Following him, I glimpsed among 
the columns a fleeing shadow, taking the stairway of the west tower.

Seized with warlike ardor, I thrust the lamp into Williom's hand and dashed blindly off toward the 
stoirs where the fugitive had descended. At that moment I felt like a soldier of Christ fighting 
all the legions of hell, and I burned with the desire to lay my hands on the stranger, to turn him 
over to my master. I tumbled down olmost the whole stairway, tripping over the hem of my habit 
(that was the only moment of my life, I swear, when I regretted having entered a monastic order!): 
but at that same instant—and it wqs the thought of qn instant—I consoled myself with the ideq that 
my adversary wqs suffering the same impediment. And, further, if he had token the book, he would 
hove his hands full. From behind the bread oven I almost dived into the kitchen, and in the starry 
light that faintly illuminated the vast entrance, I saw the shadow I was pursuing as it slipped 
past the refectory door, then pulled this shut. I rushed toward the door, I labored a few seconds 
opening it, entered, looked around, ond saw no one. The outside door was s†iII borred. I †urned. 
Shadows and silence. I noticed a glow advancing from the kitchen and I flattened myself against a 
wall. On the threshold of the passage between the two rooms a figure appeared, illuminated by a 
lamp. I cried out. It was William.

“Nobody qround* I foresaw thqt. He didn't go out through a door* He didn‘t tqke the passage through
the ossorium*”

“No, he went out through here, but I don't know where!”

“I told you: there are other passages, and it's useless for us to look for them. Perhaps our man is 
emerging at some distant spot. And with him my lenses.”

“Your lenses*”

“Yes. Our friend could not take the page away from me, but with great presence of mind, as he 
rushed past, he snatched my glasses from the desk.”

“Why*”

“Because he is no fool. He heard me speak of these notes, he realized they were important, he 
assumed that without my lenses I would be unable to decipher them, and he knows for sure that I 
would not entrust them to anyone else. In fact, now it‘s as if I didn't hove them.”

“But how did he know about your lenses*”


“Come, come. Apart from the fact that we spoke about them yesterday with the master glazier, this 
morning in the scriptorium I put them on to search omong Venantius's papers. So there are many 
people who could know how valuable those objects are to me. Actually, I could read a normal 
manuscript, but not this one.” And he was again unrolling the mysterious parchment. “The part in 
Greek is written too fine and the upper part is too hqzy. ”

He showed me the mysterious signs that had appeared as if by magic in the heat of the flame. 
“Venantius wanted to conceal an important secret, and he used one of those inks that leave no trace 
when written but reappear when warmed. Or else he used lemon juice. But since I don‘t know what 
substance he used and the signs could disappear again. quickly, you who have good eyes, copy them 
at once as faithfully as you can, perhaps enlarging them a bit.” And so I did, without knowing what 
I was copying. It was a series of four or five lines, really necromontic, and I will reproduce only 
the very first signs, to give the reader an ideo of the puzzle I had before my eyes:


When I had finished copying, William looked, unfortunately without lenses, holding my tablet at 
some distance from his nose. “I† is unquestionably a secre† alphabe† †ha† will have †o be 
deciphered,” he said. “The signs are badly drawn, and perhaps you copied them worse, but it is 
certainly a zodiacal alphabet. You see* In the first line we have”—he held the page away from him 
again and narrowed his eyes with an effort of concentration—"Sagittarius, Sun, Mercury, Scorpio.  ”
“And what do they mean*”
“If Venontius had been ingenuous he would hove used the most common zodiacal alphabet: A equals 
Sun, B equqls Jupiter. ... The first line would then read ... Try transcribing this: RACQASVL. ” He
broke off. “No, it means nothing, and Venantius was not ingenuous. He reformulated the alphabet 
according to another key. I shall have to discover it.”
“Is it possible*” I qsked, awed.

“Yes, if you know a bit of the learning of the Arabs. The best treatises on cryptography are the 
work of infidel scholars, and at Oxford I was able to have some read to me. Bacon was right in 
saying that the conquest of learning is achieved through the knowledge of languages. Abu Bakr Ahmad 
ben Ali ben Washiyyo an-Nabati wrote centuries ago a Book of the Frenzied Desire of the Devout to 
Learn the Riddles of Ancient Writings, and he expounded many rules for composing and deciphering 
mysterious alphabets, useful for magic practices but also for the correspondence between armies, or 
between a king and his envoys. I have seen other Arab books that list a series of quite ingenious 
devices. For example, you can substitute one letter for another, you can write ct word backward, 
you can put the letters to reverse order, using only every other one; and then starting over again, 
you can, as in this case, replace letters with zodiacal signs, but attributing to the hidden 
letters their numerical value, and then, according to another alphabet, convert the numbers into 
other letters.  ”
“And which of these systems can Venantius have used*”


“We would have to test them all, and others besides. But the first rule in deciphering a message is 
to guess what it means.”

“But then it's unnecessary to decipher it!” I laughed.

“Not exactly. Some hypotheses can be formed on the possible first words of the message, and then 
you see whether the rule you infer from them can apply to the rest of the text. For example, here 
Venantius has certainly noted down the key for penetrating the finis Africae. If I try thinking 
that the message is abou† this, then I am suddenly enlightened by a rhythm.  Try looking a† the 
firs†
three words, not considerin9 the letters, but the number of the s 9FI• . IIIIIIII IIIII IIIIIII. 
...
Now try dividing them into syllables of at least two signs each, and recite aloud: ta-ta-ta, ta-ta, 
ta-ta-
ta. Doesn‘t anything come to your mind*”

“No.”

“To mine, yes. ‘Secretum finis Africoe' But if this were correct, then the last word should have 
the
sqme first and sixth letter, and so it does, in fact: the symbol of the Earth is there twice. And 
the first letter of the first word, the S, should be the some as the last of the second: and, sure 
enough, the sign of the Virgin is repeated. Perhaps this is the right track. But it could also be 
just a series of coincidences. A rule of correspondence has †o be found. ”

“Found where*”

“In our heads. Invent it. And then see whether it is the right one. But with one test and another, 
the game could cost me a whole day. No more than that because—remember this—there is no secret 
writing that cannot be deciphered with a bit of patience. But now we risk losing time, qnd we want 
to visi† †he library. Especially since, wi†hou† lenses, I will never be able †o read †he second 
par† of †he message, and you cannot help me because these signs, to your eyes  ”

“Graecum est, non legitur,” I finished his sentence, humiliated. “It is Greek to me.”

“Exactly; and you see that Bacon was right. Study! But we must not lose heart. We'll put away the 
parchment and your notes, and we'll go up to the library. Because tonight not even ten infernal 
legions will succeed in keeping us out.”
I blessed myself. “But who can he have been, the man who was here ahead of us* Benno*”
“Benno was burning with the desire to know what there was omong Venantius's papers, but I can't see
him as one with the coura9e to enter the Aedificium at night.”
“Berengar, then* Or Malachi*”

“Berengar seems †o me †o hove †he couroge †o do such †hings. And, af†er oll, he shares 
responsibility for †he library. He is consumed by remorse a† having betrayed some secre† of i†; he 
†hough† Venantius had taken that book, and perhaps he wanted to return it to the place from which 
it comes. He wasn't able to go upstairs, and now he is hiding the volume somewhere.”



“But it could also be Malachi, for the same motives.”
“I would say no. Malachi had all the time he wanted to search Venantius's desk when he remained 
alone
†o shu† up †he Aedificium. I knew †ha† very well, bu† †here was no way †o avoid i†. Now we know he 
didn‘t do it. And if you think carefully, we have no reason to think Malachi knows Venontius had 
entered the library and removed something. Berengar and Benno know this, and you and I know it. 
After Adelmo's confession, Jorge may know it, but he was surely not the man who was rushing so 
furiously down the circular staircase.  ”

“Then either Berengar or Benno ”

“And why not Pacificus of Tivoli or another of the monks we saw here today* Or Nicholas the 
glozier, who knows about my glasses* Or that odd character Salvatore, who they have told us roams 
around at night on God knows what errands* We must take care not to restrict the field of suspects 
just because Benno's revelations hove oriented us in a single direction; perhaps Benno wanted to 
mislead us.”
“But he seemed sincere to you.”

“Certainly. But remember that the first duty of a good inquisitor is to suspect especially those 
who seem sincere to him.”

“A nasty job, being an inquisitor.”
“Thctt's why I gctve it up. And as you scty, I am forced to resume it. But come now. to the 
library.”

NIGHT
In which the labyrinth is finally broached, and the intruders have strange visions and, as hoppens 
in labyrinths, lose their way.

We climbed back up to the scrip†orium, this time by the eas† staircase, which rose also to the 
forbidden floor. Holdin9 †he light high before us, I †hough† of Alinardo‘s words obou† †he 
labyrinth, and I expected frightful things.

I was surprised, os we emerged into the place we should not have entered, at finding myself in a 
not very lqrge room with seven sides, windowless, where there reigned—as, for that matter, 
throughout the whole floor—a strong odor of stagnation or mold. Nothing terrifying.

The room, as I said, had seven walls, but only four of them had an opening, a passage flanked by 
two little columns set in the woll: the opening was fairly wide, surmounted by a round-headed arch. 
Agoinst
†he blind walls s†ood huge cases, laden wi†h books nea†Iy arronged. Each case bore a scroll wi†h a 
number, and so did each individual shelf; obviously the same numbers we had seen in the catalogue. 
In the midst of the room was a table, also covered with books. On all the volumes lay a fairly 
light coat of


dust, sign that the books were cleaned with some frequency. Nor was there dirt of qny kind on the 
floor. Above one of the archways, a big scroll, painted on the wall, bore the words "Apocalypsis 
lesu Christi." It did not seem faded, even though the lettering was ancient. We noticed afterward, 
also in the other rooms, that these scrolls were actually carved in the stone, cut fairly deeply, 
and the depressions had subsequently been filled with color, as painters do in frescoing churches.

We passed through one of the openings. We found ourselves in another room, where there was a window 
†ha†, in place of glass panes, had slabs of alabaster, wi†h †wo blind walls and one aperture, like 
the one we had just come through. It opened into another room, which also had two blind walls, 
another with a window, and another passage that opened opposite us. In these two rooms, the two 
scrolls were similar in form to the first we had seen, but with different words. The scroll in the 
first room said “Super thronos viginti quotuor,” and the one in the second room, "Nomen illi mors.” 
For the res†, even though the two. rooms were smaller than the one by which we had entered the 
library (actually, that one was heptagonal, these two rectan9ular), the furnishing was the same.
We entered the third room. It was bare of books and had no scroll. Under the window, a stone altar. 
There were three doors: the one by which we had entered; another, leading to the heptagonql room 
alreody visited; and a third, which led to a new room, no different from the others except for the 
scroll, which said “Obscuratus est sol et aer,” announcing the growing darkness of sun and air. 
From here you went into a new room, whose scroll said "Facta est grando et ignis,“ threatening 
turmoil and fire. This room was without other apertures: once you reached it, you could proceed no 
farther and hod †o †urn back.

"Let us think about this,” William said. "Five quadrangular or vaguely trapezoidal rooms, each with 
one window, arranged around a windowless heptagonal room to which the stairway leads. It seems 
elementary to me. We are in the east tower. From the outside eqch tower shows five windows qnd five 
sides. It works out. The empty room is the one facing east, the some direction as the choir of the 
church; the dawn sun illuminates the altar, which I find right and pious. The only clever idea, it 
seems to me, is the use of alabaster slobs. In the daytime they admit a fine light, and at night 
not even the moon's rays can penetrate. Now let's see where the other two doors of the heptqgonql 
room lead.”

My master was mistaken, and the builders of the library had been shrewder than we thought. I cannot 
explain clearly wha† happened, bu† as we lef† †he †ower room, †he order of †he rooms became more 
confused. Some had two doorways, others three. All hod one window each, even those we entered from 
a windowed room, thinking we were heading toward the interior of the Aedificium. Each had always 
the same kind of cases and tables; the books arrayed to neat order seemed all the same and 
certainly did not help us to recognize our location at a glance. We tried to orient ourselves by 
the scrolls. Once we crossed a room in which was written "In diebus illis,” "In those days,” and 
after some roaming we thought we had come back to it. But we remembered that the door opposite the 
window led into a room whose scroll said "Primogenitus mortuorum,” "The firstborn of the dead,” 
whereas now we came upon another that again said "Apocalypsis lesu Christi," though it was not the 
heptagonal room from which we had set out. This fact convinced us that sometimes the scrolls 
repeated the same words in different rooms. We found two rooms with "Apocalypsis” one after the 
other, and, immediately following them, one with "Cecidit de coelo stella magna,” “A greot star 
fell from the heavens.”


The source of the phrases on the scrolls was obvious—they were verses from the Apocalypse of 
John—but it was not at all clear why they were painted on the walls or what logic was behind their 
arrangement. To increase our confusion, we discovered that some scrolls, not many, were colored red 
instead of black.
At a certain point we found ourselves again in the original heptagonal room (easily identified 
because the stairwell began there), and we resumed moving toward our right, trying to go straight 
from room to room. We went through three rooms and then found ourselves facing a blank wall. The 
only opening led into a new room thot had only one other aperture, which we went through, and then, 
after another four rooms, we found ourselves again facing a wall. We returned to the previous room, 
which had two exits, took the one we had not tried before, went into a new room, and then found 
ourselves back in the heptagonal room of the outset.
“What was the name of the last room, the one where we began retracing our steps*” William asked. I 
strained my memory and, I had a vision of a white horse: "Equus albus."
"Good. Let's find it again.” And it was easy. From there, if we did not want to turn back as we had 
before, we could only pass through the room called “Gratia vobis et pax,” and from there, on the 
right, we thought we found a new passage, which did not take us back. Actually we again came upon 
"In diebus illis” and "Primogenitus mortuorum” (were they the rooms of a few moments earlier*); 
then finally we came †o a room †ha† we did no† seem †o have visited before: "Ter†ia pars †errae 
combus†o est.“ But even when we had learned that a third of the earth had been burned up, we still 
did not know wha† our position was wi†h respec† †o †he eas† †ower.

Holding the lamp in front of me, I ventured into the next rooms. A giant of threatening dimensions, 
a swaying and fluttering form came toword me, like a ghost.

“A devil!” I cried and almost dropped the lamp as I wheeled around and took refuge in William's 
arms. He seized the lamp from my hqnds and, thrusting me qside, stepped forward with a decisiveness 
thqt
†o me seemed sublime. He also sow something, because he brusquely stepped back. Then he leaned 
forward again and raised the lamp. He burst out laughing.
“Really ingenious. A mirror!”
“A mirror*“

“Yes, my bold warrior. You flung yourself so courageously on a real enemy a short while ago in the 
scriptorium, and now you are f• 9htenedby your own image. A mirror thot reflects your image, 
enlarged and distorted.”
He took me by the hand and led me up to the wall facing the entrance to the room. On a corrugated 
sheet of glass, now that the light illuminated it more closely, I saw our two imoges, grotesquely 
misshopen, changing form and height as we moved closer or stepped back.


“You must read some treatise on optics,“ William said, amused, “as the creators of the library 
surely did. The best ones- are by the Arabs. Alhazen wrote a treatise, De aspectibus, in which, 
with precise geometrical demonstrations, he spoke of the power of mirrors, some of which, depending 
on how their surface is gauged, can enlarge the tiniest things (what else are my lenses*), while 
others make images appear upside down, or oblique, or show two objects in the place of one, and 
four in place of two. 5tiII others, like this one, turn a dwarf into a giant or a giant into a 
dwarf.”
"Lord Jesus!” I exclaimed. “Are these, then, the visions some say they have had in the library*”
“Perhaps. A really clever idea." He read the scroll on the wall, over the mirror: “Super thronos 
viginti quatuor.” " 'The twenty-four elders upon their seats.’ We have seen this inscription 
before, but it was a room without any mirror. This one, moreover, has no windows, and yet it is not 
heptagonal. Where are we*” He looked around and went over to a case. "Adso, without those wondrous 
oculi ad legendum I cannot *'9ure out what is written on these books. Read me some titles.”
I picked out a book at random. “Master, it is not written!”
"What do you mean* I can see it is written. What do you read*“
"I am not reading. These are not letters of the alphabet, and it is not Greek. I would recognize 
it. They look like worms, snakes, fly dung. “
“Ah, it‘s Arabic. Are there others like it*"
“Yes, several. But here is one in Latin, thank God. AI ... Al-Kuwarizmi, Tabuloe.”
"The astronomical tables of Al-Kuwarizmi, translated by Adelard of Bath! A very rare work! 
Continue.”

“Isa ibn-Ali, De oculis; Alkindi, De rodiis sIeIIa†is “ "Now look on †he †able.”
I opened a great volume lying on the table, a De bestiis. I happened on a delicately illuminated 
page where a very beautiful unicorn was depicted.
“Beautifully made,” William commented, able to see the illustrations well. “And that*"
I read: "Liter monstrorum de diversis generibus. This also has beautiful imoges, but they seem 
older to me."

William bent his face to the text. “Illuminated by Irish monks, at least five centuries ago. The 
unicorn book, on the other hand, is much more recent; it seems to me made in the French fashion.” 
Once again I admired my master's erudition. We entered the next room and crossed the four rooms 
after it, all with windows, and all filled with volumes in unknown languages, in addition to some 
texts of occult sciences. Then we came to a wall, which forced us to turn back, because the last 
five rooms opened one in†o †he o†her, wi†h no o†her egress possible.



"To judge by the angles of the walls, I would say we ore in the pentagon of another tower,” William 
said, “but there is no central heptagonal room. Perhaps we are mistaken.”

“But what about the windows*” I qsked. "How can there be so many windows* It is impossible for all
†he rooms †o overlook †he outside.”

"You're forgetting the central well. Many of the windows we have seen overlook the octagon, the 
well. If it were doy, the difference in light would tell us which are externol windows and which 
internol, and perhaps would even reveal to us a room‘s position with respect to the sun. But after 
dusk no difference is perceptible. Let's go back.”

We returned to the room with the mirror and headed for the third doorway, which we thought we had 
not gone through previously. We saw before us a sequence of three or four rooms, and toward the 
last we noticed a glow.

"Someone's there!” I exclaimed in a stifled voice.

“If so, he has already seen our light," William said, nevertheless shielding the flame with his 
hand. We hesitated a moment or two. The glow continued to flicker slightly, but without growing 
stronger or weaker.

“Perhaps i† is only a lamp,“ William said, “se† here †o convince †he monks †ha† †he library is 
inhabited by the souls of the dead. But we must find out. You stay here, and keep covering the 
light. I'll go ahead cautiously.“

Still ashomed at the sorry figure I had cut before the mirror, I wanted to redeem myself in 
William's eyes. "No, I‘ll go," I said. “You stay here. I'll proceed cautiously. I am smaller and 
lighter. As soon as I've made sure there is no risk, I'll call you.”

And so I did. I proceeded through three rooms, sticking close to the walls, ligh† as a ca† (or as a 
novice descending into the kitchen to steal cheese from the larder: an enterprise in which I 
excelled at Melk). I came to the threshold of the room from which the glow, quite faint, was 
coming. I slipped along the wall to a column thot served as the right jamb, and I peered into the 
room. No one was
there. A kind of lamp was set on the table, lighted, and it was smokin9, fliCkering.It was not ct 
lamp like ours: it seemed, rather, an uncovered thurible. It had no flame, but a light ash 
smoldered, burning something. I plucked up my courage and entered. On the table beside the 
thurible, a brightly colored book was lying open. I approached and saw four strips of different 
colors on the page: yellow,
cinnobar, turquoise, and burnt sienna. A beast was set there, horrible to see, a greqt dragon with 
ten heads, dragging after him the stars of the sky and with his tail making them fall to earth. And 
suddenly I saw the dragon multiply, and the scales of his hide become a kind of forest of 
glittering shards that came off the page and took to circling around my head. I flung my head back 
and I saw the ceiling, of the room bend and press down toward me, then I heard something like the 
hiss of a thousand, serpents, but not frightening, almost seductive, and a woman appeared, bathed 
in light, and put her face to mine, breathing on me. I thrust her away with outstretched hands, and 
my hands seemed †o †ouch †he books in †he case opposite, or †o grow ou† of all proportion. I no 
longer realized


where I was, where the earth was, and where the sky. In the center of the room I saw Berengar 
storing, at me with a hoteful smile, oozing lust. I covered my foce with my hands and my hands 
seemed the claws of a toad, slimy and webbed. I cried out, I believe: there was an acid taste in my 
mouth: I plunged into infinite darkness, which seemed to yawn wider and wider beneath me; and then 
I knew nothing further.

I woke again after a time I thought was centuries, hearing some blows pounding in my head. I was 
s†re†ched ou† on †he floor and William was slapping me on †he cheeks. I was no longer in †ha† room, 
and before my eyes was a scroll †ho† said "Requiescan† a loboribus suis,“ “May †hey res† from †heir 
labors."
"Come, come, Adso," William was whispering to me. "There‘s nothing. ”
"Everything ..." I said, still delirious. “Over there, the beast ”
“No beast. I found you roving underneath a table with a beautiful Mozarobic apocalypse on it, 
opened to the pqge of the mulier amictq sole confronting the dragon. But I realized from the odor 
thqt you hod inholed something dongerous and I carried you oway immediately. My head olso aches.“
"But what did I see*”

"You saw nothing. The fact is that some substances capable of inducing visions were burning there. 
I recognized the smell: it is an Arab stuff, perhaps the same that the Old Man of the Mountain gave 
his assassins to breathe before sending them off on their missions. And so we have explained the 
mystery of the visions. Someone puts magic herbs there during the night to convince importunate 
visitors that
†he library is guarded by diabolical presences. Whq† did you experience, by †he way*”
In confusion, as bes† I could recall, I †old him of my vision, and William laughed: “For half of i† 
you were developing what you had glimpsed in the book, and for the other half you let your desires 
and your fectrs speak out. This is the operation certain herbs set in action. Tomorrow we must 
tctlk about it with Severinus: I believe he knows more than he wants us to believe. They are herbs, 
only herbs, requiring none of those necromantic preparations the glacier talked to us about. Herbs, 
mirrors  This
place of forbidden knowledge is guarded by many and most cunning devices. Knowledge is used to 
conceal, rather than to enlighten. I don‘t like it. A perverse mind presides over the holy defense 
of the library. But this has been a toilsome ni9ht;we must lectve here for the present. You're 
distraught and you need water and fresh air. It's useless to try to open these windows. too high, 
and perhaps closed for decades. How could they think Adelmo had thrown himself down from here*“
Leave, William hqd said. As if it were easy. We knew the library could be reached only from one 
tower, the eastern one. But where were we at that moment* We had completely lost our orientation. 
We wandered, fearing never to emerge from that place again; I, still stumbling, seized with fits of 
vomiting; and William, somewha† worried abou† me and irri†a†ed by †he inadequacy of his learning: 
bu† this wandering gave us, or gave him, an idea for the following day. We would come back to the 
library, assuming we ever got out of it, with a charred firebrand, or some other substance capable 
of leaving signs on the walls.


“To find the way out of a labyrinth,” William recited, “there is only one means. At every new 
junction, never seen before, the path we have token will be marked with three signs. If, because of 
previous signs on some of the paths of the junction, you see that the junction has already been 
visited, you will make only one mark on the path you have taken. If all the apertures have already 
been marked, then you must retrace your steps. But if one or two apertures of the junction ctre 
still without signs, you will choose any one, making two signs on it. Proceeding through on 
aperture that bears only one sign, you will make two more, so that now the aperture bears three. Ay 
the parts of the labyrinth must have been visited if, arriving at a junction, you never take a 
passage with three signs, unless none of the other passages is now without signs.”
“How do you know that* Are you an expert on labyrinths*” “No, I am citing an ancient text I once 
read.”
“And by observing †his rule you ge† ou†*”

“Almost never, as far qs I know. But we will try it, all the sqme. And besides, within the next day 
or so I will have lenses ond †ime †o devo†e myself more †o †he books. I† may be †ha† where †he 
succession of scrolls confuses us, the arrangement of the books will give us a rule.”

“You'll have your lenses* How will you find them again*”

“I said I'll have lenses. I'll have new ones made. I believe the glazier is eager for an 
opportunity of this kind, to try something new. As long as he has the right tools for grinding the 
bits of glass. When it comes to bits of gloss, he has plenty in his workshop.”

As we roamed, seeking the way, suddenly, in the center of one room, I felt an invisible hand stroke 
my cheek, while a groan, not human and not animal, echoed in both that room and the next, as if a 
ghost were wandering from one to the other. I should have been prepared for the library's 
surprises, but once agqin I wqs terrified and leaped backward. William must have had qn experience 
similar to mine, because he was touching his cheek as he held up the light and looked around.

He raised one hand, examined the flame, which now seemed brighter, then moistened a finger and held 
it stroight in front of him.

“It's clear,” he said then, and showed me two points, on opposite walls, at a man‘s height. Two 
narrow slits opened there, and if you put your hand to them you could feel the cold air coming from 
outside. Putting your ear to them, you could heor a rustling sound, as of a wind blowing outside.

“The library must, of course, have o ventilation system,” Williom said. "Otherwise the atmosphere 
would be stifling, especially in the summer. Moreover, those slits provide the right amount of 
humidity, so the parchments will not dry out. But the cleverness of the founders did not stop 
there. Placing the slits at certoin angles, they made sure that on windy nights the gusts 
penetrating from these openings would encounter other gusts, and swirl inside the sequence of 
rooms, producing the sounds we have heard. Which, along with the mirrors and the herbs, increase 
the fear of the foolhardy who come in here, as we have, without knowing the place well. And we 
ourselves for a moment thought ghosts were


breathing on our faces. We've realized it only now because the wind frets sprung up only now. So 
this mystery, too, is solved. But we still don't know how to get out!”

As we spoke, we wandered aimlessly, now bewildered, not bothering to read the scrolls, which seemed 
all alike. We came into q new heptqgonal room, we went through the nearby rooms, we found no exit. 
We retroced our steps and walked for almost an hour, making no effort to discover where we were. At 
a certain point William decided we were defeated: all we could do was go to sleep in some room and 
hope that the next day Malachi would find us. As we bemoaned the miserable end of our bold 
adventure, we suddenly found agoin the room from which the stairway descended. We fervently thanked 
heaven and went down in high spirits.

Once we were in the kitchen, we rushed to the fireplace and entered the corridor of the ossarium, 
and
I sweor that the deathly grin of those fleshless heads looked to me like the smiles of dear 
friends. We reentered the church and came out through the north door, finally sitting down happily 
on the tombstones. The beoutiful night air seemed a divine balm. The stars shone around us and I 
felt the visions of †he library were far away.

“How beautiful the world is, and how ugly labyrinths ore,” I said, relieved.

“How beautiful †he world would be if †here were a procedure for moving through labyrinths,” my 
master replied.

We walked along the left side of the church, passed the great door (I looked away, to avoid seeing 
the elders of the Apocalypse: "Super thronos viginti quatuor“!), and crossed the cloister to reach 
the pilgrims' hospice.

A† †he door of †he building s†ood †he abbo†, storing a† us sternly.. “I have been looking for you 
all night,” he said to William. “I did not find you in your cell, I did not find you in church. ”

“We were pursuing a trail ” William said vaguely, with visible embarrassment. The abbot gave him q
long look, †hen soid in o slow and severe voice, “I looked for you immediately af†er compline. 
Berengar was not in choir.”

“What are you telling me*” William said, with a cheerful expression. In fact, it was now clear to 
him who had been in ambush in †he scrip†orium.

“He was no† in choir a† compline,” †he abbo† repeated, and has no† come back †o his cell. Ma†ins 
are
about to ring, and we will now see if he reappeors. Otherwise I fear some new calamity.”
A† mo†ins Berengar was absen†.

THIRD DAY

FROM LAUDS TO PRIME



In which a bloodstained cloth is found in the cell of Berengar, who has disappeared; and that is 
all.
In setting down these words, I feel weary, as I felt that night—or, rather, that morning. What can 
be sctid* Af†er ma†ins †he abbo† sen† mos† of †he monks, now in a sta†e of alarm, †o seek 
everywhere: but without any result.

Toward lauds, searching Berengar's cell, a monk found under the pallet a white cloth stained with 
blood. He showed it to the abbot, who drew the direst omens from it. Jorge was present, and as soon 
as he was informed, he said, “Blood*” as if the thing seemed improbable to him. They told Alinardo, 
who shook his head and said, “No, no, at the third trumpet death comes by water. ”
William examined the cloth, then said, “Now everything is clear.” “Where is Berengar*” they asked 
him.
“I don't know,” he answered. Aymqro heard him and raised his eyes to heqven, murmuring to Peter of 
Sant’Albano, “Typically English.”

Toward prime, when the sun was already up, servants were sent to explore the toot of the cliff, all 
around the walls. They came back at terce, having found nothing.

William told me that we could not have done any better. We had to await events. And he went to the 
forges, to engage in a deep conversation with Nicholas, the master glazier.

I sat in church, near the central door, as the Masses were sqid. And so I fell devoutly qsleep and 
slept a long †ime, because young people seem †o need sleep more †han †he old, who have already 
slep† so much and are preparing to sleep for all eternity.

TERCE

In which Adso, in the scriptorium, reflects on the history of his order and on the destiny of 
books.

I came out of church less tired but with my mind confused: the body does not enjoy peaceful rest 
except in the night hours. I went up to the scriptorium and, after obtaining Malachi's permission, 
began to leaf through the catalogue. But as I glanced absently at the pages passing before my eyes, 
I was really observing the monks.

I was struck by their calm, their serenity. Intent on their work, they seemed to forget that one of 
their brothers was being anxiously sought throughout the grounds, and that two others had 
disappeared in frightful circumstances. Here, I said to myself, is the greatness of our order: for 
centuries and centuries men like †hese have seen †he barbarian hordes burs† in, sock †heir abbeys, 
plunge kingdoms into chasms of fire, and yet they have gone on cherishing parchments and inks, have 
continued to read, moving their lips over words that have been handed down through centuries and


which they will hand down to the centuries to come. They went on receding and copying as the
millennium approached; why should they not continue to do so now*

The day before, Benno had said he would be prepared to sin in order to procure a rare book. He was 
no† lying and no† joking. A monk should surely love his books wi†h humility, wishing †heir good and 
no† the glory of his own curiosity; but what the temptation of adultery is for laymen and the 
yearning for riches is for secular ecclesiastics, the seduction of knowledge is for monks.

I leafed through the catalogue, and a feas† of mysterious titles danced before my eyes: Quin†i 
Sereni de medicamen†is, Phaenomena, Liber Aesopi de na†ura animalium, Liber Ae†hici peronymi de 
cosmogrophia, Libei tres quos Arculphus episcopus Adamnano escipiente de locis sanctis ultramarinis 
designovit conscribendos, Libellus Q. lulii Hilarionis de origine mundi, Solini Polyhistor de situ 
orbis terrarum et mirabilibus, Almagesthus. ... I was not surprised thot the mystery of the crimes 
should involve the library. For these men devoted to writing, the library was at once the celestial 
Jerusalem and an underground world on the border between terra incognita and Hades. They were 
dominated by the library, by its promises and by its prohibitions. They lived with it, for it, and 
perhaps against it, sinfully hoping one dcty to violctte all its secrets. Why should they not hctve 
risked dectth to scttisfy a curiosity of †heir minds, or have killed †o preven† someone from 
appropriating a jealously guarded secre† of †heir own*

Temptations, to be sure, intellectual pride. Quite different was the scribe-monk imagined by our 
soin†ed founder, capoble of copying wi†hou† understanding, surrendered †o †he will of God, writing 
as if praying, and praying inasmuch as he was writing. Why was it no longer so* Oh, this was surely 
not
†he only degeneration of our order! I† had become †oo powerful, i†s abbo†s competed wi†h kings: in 
Abo did I not perhops have the example of a monarch who, with monarch's demeanor, tried to settle 
controversies between monarchs* The very knowledge thqt the abbeys had accumulated was now used as 
bar†er goods, cause for pride, mo†ive for boosting and prestige: jus† as knights displayed armor 
and standards, our abbots displayed illuminated manuscripts  And all the more so now (what 
madness!),
when our monasteries had also lost the leadership in learning: cathedral schools, urban 
corporations, universities were copying books, perhaps more and better than we, and producing new 
ones, qnd this may have been the cause of many misfortunes.

The abbey where I was staying was probably †he las† †o boas† of excellence in †he production and 
reproduction of learning. But perhaps for this very reason, the monks were no longer content with 
the holy work of copying; they wanted also to produce new complements of nature, impelled by the 
lust for novelty. And they did not realize, as I sensed vaguely at that moment (and know clearly 
today, now aged in years and experience), that in doing so they sanctioned the destruction of their 
excellence.
Becouse if this new learning they wanted to produce were to circulate freely outside those walls, 
then nothin9 woUld distinguish that sacred place any Ion9er from a cathedral school or a city 
university.
Remaining isolated, on the other hand, it maintained its prestige and its strength intact, it was 
not
corrupted by disputation, by the quodlibetical conceit that would subject every mystery and every 
greatness to the scrutiny of the sic et non. There, I said to myself, are the reasons for the 
silence and the darkness that surround the library: it is the preserve of learning but con maintain 
this learning unsullied only if it prevents its reaching anyone at all, even the monks themselves. 
Learning is not like a coin, which remains physically whole even through the most infamous 
transactions; it is, rather, like a very handsome dress, which is worn out through use and 
ostentation. Is not a book like


†ho†, in fac†* I†s pages crumble, i†s ink and gold †urn dull, if †oo many hqnds †ouch i†. I saw 
Pqcificus of Tivoli, leafing through an ancien† volume whose pages had become s†uck †oge†her 
because of †he humidity. He moistened his thumb and forefinger with his tongue to leaf through his 
book, and at every touch of his saliva those pages lost vigor; opening them meant folding them, 
exposing them to the harsh action of air qnd dust, which would erode the subtle wrinkles of the 
parchment, and would produce mildew where the saliva had softened but also weakened the corner of 
the page. As an excess of sweetness makes the warrior flaccid and inept, this excess of possessive 
and curious love would make †he book vulnerable †o †he disease destined †o kill i†.

What should be done* Stop reading, and only preserve* Were my fears correct* What would my master 
have said*

Nearby I sow a rubrica†or, Magnus of Iona, who had finished scraping his vellum with pumice stone 
and was now softening it with chalk, soon to smooth the surface with the ruler. Another, next to 
him, Robano of Toledo, had fixed the parchment to the desk, pricking the margins with tiny holes on 
both sides, between which, with- a metal stylus, he was now drawing very fine horizontal lines. 
Soon the two pqges would be filled with colors and shapes, the sheet would become q kind of 
reliquary, glowing with gems studded in wha† would †hen be †he devou† †ex† of †he writing. Those 
†wo brothers, I said †o myself, are living their hours of paradise on earth. They were producing 
new books, just like those
†ha† †ime would inexorably destroy. ... Therefore, †he library could no† be †hrea†ened by any 
earthly force, it wqs a living thing.  But if it was living, why should it not be opened to the 
risk of knowledge*
Was this what Benno wanted and what Venantius perhaps had wanted*
I felt confused, afraid of my own thoughts. Perhaps they were not fitting for a novice, who should 
only follow the Rule scrupulously and humbly through all the years to come—which is what I 
subsequently did, without asking myself further questions, while around me the world was sinking 
deeper and deeper in†o a s†orm of blood and madness.

It was the hour of our morning meal. I went to the kitchen, where by now I hod become a friend of 
the cooks, and they gqve me some of the best morsels.

SEXT

In which Adso receives the confidences of Salvatore, which cannot be summarized in a few words, but 
which cause him long and concerned meditation.

As I was ea†ing, I sow Solva†ore in one corner, obviously hoving mode his peace wi†h †he cook, for 
he was merrily devouring ct mutton pie. He ctte as if he had never eaten before in his life, not 
letting even a crumb fall, and he seemed †o be giving †hanks †o God for †his extraordinary even†.

He winked at me and said, in that bizarre language of his, that he was eating for all the years 
when he hod fas†ed. I questioned him. He †oId me of o very poinful childhood in o village where †he 
oir was bad, the rains frequent, where the fields rotted while the air was polluted by deathly 
miasmas. There were floods, or so I understood, season after season, when the fields had no furrows 
and with a bushel of seed you harvested a sextary, and then the sextary was reduced to nothing. 
Even the overlords had


white faces like the poor, although, Solvatore remarked, the poor died in greater numbers than the 
gentry did, perhaps (he smiled) because there were more of them.  A sextary cost fifteen pence, a
bushel sixty pence, the preachers announced the end of the world, but Salvatore's parents and 
grandparents remembered the same story in the past as well, so they came to the conclusion that the 
world was always about to end. And after they had ectten all the bird carcasses and all the unclean 
animals they could find, there was a rumor in the village that somebody was beginning to dig up the 
dead. Salvatore explained with great dramatic ability, as if he were an actor, how those "homeni 
malissimi" behaved, the wicked men who scrabbled with their fingers in the earth of the cemeteries 
the day after somebody's funeral. "Yum!" he soid, and bit into his mutton pie, but I could see on 
his face the grimace of the desperate man eating the corpse. And then, not content with digging in 
consecrated ground, some, worse than the others, like highwaymen, crouched in the forest and took 
travelers by surprise. "Thwack!" Salvatore said, holding his knife to his throat, and "Nyum!" And 
the worst among the worst accosted boys, offering an egg or on apple, and then devoured them, 
though, as Salvatore explained to me very gravely, always cooking them first. He told of a man who 
came to the village selling cooked meat for a few pence, and nobody could understand this great 
stroke of luck, but then the priest said it was human flesh, and the man was torn to pieces by the 
infuriated crowd. Thot sctme night, however, one mctn from the villctge went and dug up the grave 
of the murdered victim and ate the flesh of the cannibal, whereupon, since he was discovered, the 
village put him to death, too.

Bu† Salva†ore did no† †elI me only †his †aIe. In broken words, obliging me †o recall wha† Ii††le I 
knew of Provens«l and of Italian dialects, he told me the story of his flight from his native 
village and his roaming abou† †he world. And in his s†ory I recognized mony men I had already known 
or encountered along the road, and I now recognize many more that I have met since, so that after 
all this time I may even attribute to him adventures and crimes that belonged, to others, before 
him and after him, and which now, to my tired mind, flatten out to form a single image. This, in 
fact, is the power of the imagination, which, combining the memory of gold with thot of the 
mountain, can compose the idea of a golden mountain.
Often during our journey I heard William mention "the simple," a term by which some of his brothers 
denoted not only the populace but, at the same time, the unlearned. This expression qlwctys seemed 
to me generic, because in the Italian cities I had met men of trade and artisans who were not 
clerics but were not unlearned, even if their knowledge was revealed through the use of the 
vernacular. And, for that matter, some of the tyrants who governed the peninsula at that time were 
ignorant of theological learning, and medical, and of logic, and ignorant of Latin, but they were 
surely not simple or benighted. So I believe that even my master, when he spoke of the simple, was 
using a rather simple concept. But unquestionably Salvatore was simple. He came from a rural land 
that for centuries had been subjected to famine and the arrogance of the feudal lords. He was 
simple, but he was not a fool. He yearned for a different world, which, when he fled from his 
family's house, I gathered, assumed the aspect of the land of Cockaigne, where wheels of cheese and 
aromatic sausages 9rowon the trees that ooze honey.
Driven by such a hope, as if refusing to recognize this world as a vale of tears where (as they 
taught me) even injustice is foreordained by Providence †o maintain †he balance of †hings, whose 
design of†en eludes us, Salvatore journeyed through vorious lands, from his native Montferrat 
toward Ligurio, then up through Provence into the lands of the King of France.


Salvatore wandered through the world, begging, pilfering, pretendin9to be ill, entering the 
temporary service of some lord, then again taking to the forest or the high road. From the story he 
told me, I pictured him among those bands of vagrants that in the years that followed I saw more 
and more often roaming about Europe: false monks, charlatans, swindlers, cheats, tramps and 
tatterdemalions, lepers and cripples, jugglers, invalid mercenaries, wondering Jews escaped from 
the infidels with their spirit broken, lunatics, fugitives under banishment, malefoctors with an 
ear cut off, sodomites, and along with them ambulant artisans, weavers, tinkers, chair-menders, 
knife-grinders, basket-weavers,
masons, and also rogues of every stripe, lodgers, scoundrels, cardsharps, rascals, bullies, 
reprobates, recreonts, frauds, hooligans, simoniacal and embezzling canons and priests, people who 
lived on the credulity of others, counterfeiters of bulls and papal seals, peddlers of indulgences, 
false paralytics who lay a† church doors, vagrants fleeing from convents, relic-sellers, pordoners, 
soo†hsoyers and fortunetellers, necromancers, healers, bogus alms-seekers, fornicators of every 
sort, corruptors of nuns and maidens by deception and violence, simulators of dropsy, epilepsy, 
hemorrhoids, tout, and sores, as well as melancholy madness. There were those who put plasters on 
their bodies to imitate incurable ulcerations, o†hers who filled †heir mou†hs wi†h a blood-colored 
substance †o feign accesses of consumption, rascals who pretended to be weak in one of their limbs, 
carrying unnecessary crutches and imi†a†ing †he falling sickness, scabies, buboes, swellings, while 
applying bandages, †inc†ure of saffron, carrying irons on their hands, their heads swathed, 
slipping into the churches stinking, and suddenly fainting in the squares, spitting saliva and 
popping their eyes, making the nostrils spurt blood concoc†ed of blackberry juice and vermilion, †o 
wres† food or money from †he frightened people who recalled the church fathers' exhortations to 
give alms. Share your bread with the hungry, take the homeless to your hearth, we visit Christ, we 
house Christ, we clothe Christ, because as water purges fire so charity purges our sins.

Long after the events I am narrating, olong the course of the Danube I saw many, and still see 
some, of †hese chqrIa†qns who had †heir names and †heir subdivisions in legions, like †he devils.

It was like a mire that flowed over the paths of our world, and with them mingled preachers in good 
faith, heretics in search of new victims, agitators of discord. It was Pope John—always fearing 
movements of the simple who might preach and practice poverty—who inveighed against the mendicant 
preachers, for, he said, they attracted the curious by raising bonners with painted figures, 
preaching, and extorting money. Was the simoniacal and corrupt Pope right in considering the 
mendicant monks preaching poverty †he equivalen† of bands of ou†cas†s and robbers* In †hose days, 
having journeyed a bit in the Italian peninsula, I no longer had firm opinions on the subject: I 
had heard of the monks of Altopascio, who, when they preached, threatened excommunications and 
promised indulgences, absolved those who committed robberies and fratricides, homicides and 
perjury, for money; they let it be believed that in their hospital every day up to a hundred Masses 
were said, for which they collected donations, and they said that with their income they supplied 
dowries for two hundred poor maidens. And I had heard tales of Brother Paolo Zoppo, who in the 
forest of Rieti lived cts a hermit and boasted of having received directly from the Holy Spirit the 
revelation that the carnal act was not a sin—so he seduced his victims, whom he called sisters, 
forcing them to submit to the lash on their naked flesh, making five genuflections on the ground in 
the form of a cross, before he presented them to God and claimed from them what he called the kiss 
of peace. But was it true* And what link was there between these hermits who were said to be 
enlightened and the monks of poor life who roamed the roads of the peninsula really doing penance, 
disliked by the clergy and the bishops, whose vices and thefts they excoriated*



From Salvotore's tale, as it become mingled with the things I already knew from my own experience, 
these distinctions did not emerge clearly: everything looked the same as everything else. At times 
he seemed †o me one of †hose crippled beggars of Touraine who, as †he s†ory goes, †ook ligh† a† †he 
approach of the miraculous corpse of Saint Martin, for they feared the sctint would heal them and 
thus deprive them of their source of income, and the saint mercilessly saved them before they 
reached the border, punishing their wickedness by restoring to them the use of their limbs. At 
times, however, the monk's ferocious face brightened with a sweet glow as he told me how, when 
living among those bonds, he listened to the word of the Franciscan preachers, as ou†cas† as he 
was, and he understood that the poor and vagabond life he led should be taken, not as a grim 
necessity, but as a joyous ac† of dedication, and he joined peni†en†ial sec†s and groups whose 
names he could no† pronounce properly and whose doctrine he defined in highly unlikely terms. I 
deduced that he had encountered Patarines and Waldensians, and perhaps Cathorists, Arnoldists, and 
Umilioti, and that, roaming about the world, he had passed from one group to another, gradually 
assuming as a mission his vagrant state, and doing for the Lord what he had done till then for his 
belly.

But how, qnd for how long* As far qs I could tell, qbout thirty yeqrs before, he had joined a 
convent of Minorites in Tuscany, and there he had ossumed the hobit of Soint Francis, without 
taking orders. There, I believe, he learned that smattering of Latin he spoke, mixing it with the 
speech of all the places where he had been as a poor homeless wanderer, and of all †he vagabond 
companions he had encountered, from the mercenaries of my lands to the Bogomils of Dalmatia. In the 
convent he had devoted himself to a life of penance, he soid (Penitenziogite, he quoted to me, with 
eyes shining, and I heard again the expression that had aroused William's curiosity), but 
apparently also the monks he was staying with had confused ideas, because, enraged by the canon of 
the neighboring church, who was accused of thefts and other wickedness, they invaded his house one 
day and sent him flying down the steps, and the sinner died; then they looted his house. For which 
the bishop sent his armed guards, the monks were dispersed, and Salvatore roamed ot length in 
northern Italy with a band of Froticelli, or mendicant Minorites, at this point without any law or 
discipline.

From there he took refuge in the Toulouse region and a strange adventure befell him, for he wets 
inflamed by hearing the story of the crusaders' great enterprises. A horde of shepherds and humble 
folk in great numbers gathered one day to cross the sea and fight against the enemies of the faith. 
They were called the Pastoureaux, the Shepherds. Actually, they wanted to escape their own wretched 
land. There were two leaders, who filled their heads with false theories: a priest who had been 
dismissed from his church because of his conduct, and an apostate monk of the order of Saint 
Benedict. This pair drove ignorant men so mad that they came running after the two in throngs, even 
boys of sixteen, against their parents' wishes, carrying only knapsack and stick, all without 
money, leaving their fields, to follow the leaders like a flock, and they formed a greo† crowd. A† 
this poin† they would no longer heed reason or justice, but only power ctnd their own caprice. 
Gctthered together and finally free, with a dim hope of promised lands, they were as if drunk. They 
stormed through villages and cities, taking everything, and if one of their number was arrested, 
they would attack the prison and free him. And they killed all the Jews they came upon here and 
there and stripped them of their possessions.

“Why the Jews*” I asked Salvatore. He answered, “And why not*” He explained to me that all his life 
preachers had told him the Jews were the enemies of Christianity and accumulated possessions that


had been denied the Christian poor. I asked him, however, whether it wqs not qlso true thqt lords 
and bishops accumulated possessions through tithes, so that the Shepherds were not fighting their 
true enemies. He replied that when your true enemies are too strong, you have to choose weaker 
enemies. I reflected that this is why the simple are so called. Only the powerful always know with 
great clarity who their true enemies are. The lords did not want the Shepherds to jeopardize their 
possessions, and it was o great good fortune for them that the Shepherds' leaders spread the notion 
that the greatest wealth longed to the Jews.

I asked him who had put into the crowd's head the idea of attacking the Jews. Salvatore could not 
remember. I believe †ha† when such crowds collec†, lured by a promise and immediately demandin9 
something, there is never any knowing who among them speaks. I recalled that their leaders had been 
educated in convents and cathedral schools, and they spoke the language of the lords, even if they 
translated it into terms thot the Shepherds could understand. The Shepherds did not know where the 
Pope was, but they knew where the Jews were. Anyway, they laid siege to a high and massive tower of 
the King of France, where the frightened Jews had run in a body to take refuge. And the Jews 
sallying forth below the walls of the tower defended themselves courageously and pitilessly, 
hurling wood and stones. But the Shepherds set fire to the gctte of the tower, tormenting the 
barricctded Jews with smoke and flames. And the Jews, unable to defeat their attackers, preferring 
to kill themselves rather than die at the hand of the uncircumcised, asked one of their number, who 
seemed the most courageous, to put them all to the sword. He consented, and killed almost five 
hundred of them. Then he came out of the tower with the children of the Jews, and asked the 
Shepherds to baptize him. But the Shepherds said to him: You have massacred your people and now you 
want to evade death* And they tore him to pieces; but they spared the children, whom they baptized. 
Then they headed for Carcassonne, carrying out many bloody robberies along the way. Then the King 
of France warned them thot they had gone too far and ordered that they be resisted in every city 
they passed through, and he proclaimed thctt even the Jews should be defended as if they were the 
King‘s men. ..
Why did the King become so considerate of the Jews at that point* Perhaps because he was beginning 
to realize what the Shepherds might do throughout the kingdom, and he was concerned becouse their 
number was increasing too rapidly. Further, he was moved to tenderness for the Jews, both because 
the Jews were useful to the trade of the kingdom, and because now it was necessary to destroy the 
Shepherds, and all good Christians had to have a good reason to weep over their crimes. But many 
Christians did not obey the King, thinking it wrong to defend the Jews, who had always been enemies 
of the Christian faith. And in many cities the humble people, who had had to pay usury to the Jews,
were happy to see the Shepherds punish them for their wealth. Then the Kin9Commanded,under pain of 
death, that no aid be given the Shepherds. He gathered a considerable army and attacked them, and 
many of them were killed, while others saved themselves by taking flight and seeking refuge in the 
forests, but there they died of hardship. Soon all were annihilated. The King's general captured 
them and hanged them, twenty or thirty at a time, from the hi9hesttrees, so the sight of their 
corpses would serve as an eternal example and no one would dore to disturb the peace of the realm 
again.

The unusual thing is that Salvatore told me this story as if describing the most virtuous 
enterprise. And in fact he remained convinced that the home of so-called Shepherds had aimed to 
conquer the sepulcher of Christ and free it from the infidels, and it was impossible for me to 
convince him that this fine conquest had already been achieved, in the days of Peter the Hermit and 
Saint Bernard, and under the reign of Saint Louis of France. In any case, Salvatore did not reach 
the infidels, because he


had to leave French territory in a hurry. He went into the Novara region, he told me, but he was 
very vague about what hoppened at this point. And finally he arrived at Casale, where he was 
received by the convent of Minorites (and here I believe he met Remigio) at the very time when many 
of them, persecuted by the Pope, were changing habit and them, refuge in monasteries of other 
orders, to avoid being burned at the stake. As, indeed, Ubertino had told us. Thanks to his long 
familiarity with many manual tasks (which he had performed both for dishonest purposes, when he wos 
roaming freely, and for holy purposes, when he was roaming for the love of Christ), Salvatore was 
immediately taken on by the cellarer as his personal assistant. And that was why he had been here 
for many years, with scont interest in the order‘s pomp, but much to the administration of its 
cellar and lorder, where he was free to eat without stealing and to praise the Lord without being 
burned.

I looked a† him wi†h curiosity, no† because of †he singularity of his experience, bu† because wha† 
had hoppened to him seemed to me the splendid epitome of so mony events and movements that mode the 
Italy of that time fascinating and incomprehensible.

What had emerged from those tales* The picture of a man who had led an adventurous life, capable 
even of killing a fellow mqn wi†hou† realizing his own crime. Bu† qI†hough q† †hq† †ime one offense 
†o the divine law seemed to me the some as another, I was already beginning to understand some of 
the phenomena I was hearing discussed, and I saw that it is one thing for a crowd, in an almost 
ecstatic frenzy, mistaking the laws of the Devil for those of the Lord, to commit a massacre, but 
it is another thing for an individual to commit a crime in cold blood, with calculation, in 
silence. And it did not seem
†o me †ha† Solva†ore could have stained his soul wi†h such o crime.

On †he o†her hand, I wan†ed †o discover something abou† †he abbo†‘s insinuations, and I was 
obsessed by the idea of Fra Dolcino, of whom I knew almost nothing, though his ghost seemed to 
hover over many conversations I hqd heqrd these past few days.

So I asked Salvatore point-blank: “In your journeys did you ever meet Fra Dolcino*“

His reaction was most strange. He widened his eyes, if it were possible to open them wider than 
they were, he blessed himself repeatedly, murmured some broken phroses in a language that this time 
I really did not understand. But they seemed to me phrases of denial. Until then he had looked at 
me with good-natured trust, I would say with friendship. At that moment he looked at me almost with 
irritation. Then, inventing an excuse, he left.

Now I could no longer resist. Who was this monk who inspired terror in anyone who heard his name 
mentioned* I decided I could not remain any longer in the grip of my desire to know. An idea 
crossed my mind. Ubertino! He himself had uttered that name, the first evening we met him; he knew 
everything of the vicissitudes, open and secret, of monks, friars, and other species of these last 
years. Where could I find him at this hour* Surely in church, immersed in prayer. And since I was 
enjoying a moment of liberty, I went there.

I did not find him: indeed, I did not find him until evening. And so my curiosity stayed with me, 
for
o†her even†s were occurring, of which I mus† now †eII.



NONES

In which William speaks to Adso of the great river of heresy, of the function of the simple within 
the church, of his doubts concerning the possibility of knowing universal laws; and almost 
parenthetically he tells how he deciphered the necromantic signs left by Venantius.

I found William at the forge, working with Nicholas, both deeply involved in their task. On the 
counter they had laid out a number of tiny glass discs, perhaps originally intended as parts of a 
window; with instruments they hod reduced some of these to the desired thickness. William was 
holding them up before his eyes, testing them. Nicholas, for his part, was issuing instructions to 
the smiths for making
†he fork in which †he correc† lenses would be se†.

William was grumbling, irritated because so far the most satisfactory lens was an emerald color, 
and, as he said, he did not want parchments to seem meadows to him. Nicholas went off to supervise 
the smiths. As William tried out the various discs, I told him of my dialogue with Salvatore.
“The mqn has hqd various experiences,“ he said. "Perhaps he actually was with the Dolcinians. The 
abbey really is o microcosm, and when we have Pope John‘s envoys ond Brother Michael here, we‘ll be 
complete.”

"Master,” I said to him, "I understand nothing.” "About what, Adso*"
“First, about the differences among heretical groups. But I‘ll ask you about that later. Now I am
†ormen†ed by †he problem of difference i†seIf. When you were speaking wi†h Ubertino, I had †he 
impression you were trying to prove to him that all are the same, saints and heretics. But then, 
speaking with the abbot, you were doing your best to explain to him the difference between one 
heretic and another, and between the heretical and the orthodox. In other words, you reproached 
Ubertino for considering differen† †hose who were basically †he same, qnd †he abbo† for considering 
the same those who were basically different.”

William set the lenses on the table for a moment. "My good Adso,” he said, "we will try now to make 
some distinctions, and we moy as well use the terms of the school of Paris for our distinguishing. 
So: they say all men hqve the same substantial form, am I right*”

"Of course," I said, proud of my knowledge, "men are animals but rational, and the property of man 
is the capacity for laughing.“

"Excellent. But Thomas is different from Bonaventure, Thomas is fat while Bonoventure is thin, ond 
it may even be †ha† Hugh is bad while Francis is good, and Aldemar is phlegmatic while Agilulf is 
bilious. Or am I mistaken*”

"No, that is the case, beyond any doubt.”


“Then this means there is identity in different men as to their substantial form, and diversity as 
to the accidents, or as to their superficial shape.“
"That is so, unquestionably.”
"When I soy to Ubertino that human nature itself, in the complexity of its operations, governs both 
the love of good and the love of evil, I am trying to convince Ubertino of the identity of human 
nature. When I say to the abbot, however, that there is a difference between a Catharist and a 
Waldensian, I am insisting on the variety of their accidents. And I insist on it because a 
Woldensian may be burned after the accidents of a Catharist have been attributed to him, and vice 
versa. And when you burn a man you burn his individual substance and reduce to pure nothing that 
which was a concrete act of existing, hence in itself good, at least in the eyes of God, who kept 
him in existence. Does this seem to you a good reason for insisting on the differences*“

"The trouble is," I said, "I can no longer distinguish the occidental difference among Waldensians, 
Cothorists, the poor of Lyons, the Umiliati, the Beghards, Joachimites, Patarines, Apostles, Poor 
Lombards, Arnoldists, Williamites, Followers of the Free Spirit, and Luciferines. What qm I to do*”

"Oh, poor Adso," William said, laughing and giving me an affectionate slap on the nape, “you're not 
really wrong! You see, it‘s as if, over the last two centuries, and even earlier, this world of 
ours had been struck by storms of intolerance, hope, and despair, all together.  No, that's not a 
good analogy.
Imagine a river, wide and majestic, which flows for miles and miles between strong embankments, 
where the land is firm. At a certain point, the river, out of weariness, because its flow has taken 
up too much time and too much space, because it is approaching the sea, which annihilates all 
rivers in itself, no longer knows who† i† is, loses its identity. I† becomes its own delta. A major 
branch may remain, bu† many break off from i† in every direction, and some flow †oge†her again, 
in†o one another, and you can‘t tell what begets what, and sometimes you can't tell what is still 
river and what is already sea.  ”

“If I understand your allegory, the river is the city of God, or the kingdom of the just, which is 
approaching the millennium, and in this uncertointy it no longer remains secure, false and true 
prophets are born, and everything flows into the great plain where Armageddon will take place. ”

“Thot isn't exactly what I was thinking. I was trying to explain to you how the body of the church, 
which for centuries was also the body of all society, the people of God, has become too rich, and 
wide, and it carries along the dross of all the countries it has passed through, and it has lost 
its own purity. The branches of the delta are, if you like, so many attempts of the river to flow 
as quickly as possible to the sea, thot is, to the moment of purification. My allegory was meant 
only to tell you how the branches of heresy and the movements of renewal, when the river is no 
longer intact, are numerous and become mingled. You can also odd †o my poor allegory †he image of 
someone who is †rying †o reconstruct the banks of the river with brute strength, but cannot do so. 
And some branches of the deI†a sil† up, o†hers are redirected †o †he river by artificial channels, 
s†iII o†hers are allowed †o flow, because it is impossible to restrain everything and it is better 
for the river to lose a port of its water and still maintain its course, if i† wants to have a 
recognizable course.“
"I understand less and less.”



“So do I. I'm not good at speoking in parobles. Forget this story of the river. Try instead to 
understand that many of the movements you mentioned were born at least two hundred years ago and 
are already dead, yet others are recent. ”
“But when heretics are discussed, they are all mentioned together.”
“True, and this is one of the ways heresy spreads and one of the ways it is destroyed.” “Again I 
don't understand.”
“God, how difficult it is. Very well. Imagine you are a reformer of morals and you collect some 
companions on a mountaintop, to live in poverty. And after a while you see thot mony come to you, 
even from distant lands, and they consider you a prophet, or a new ctpostle, and they follow you. 
Have they really come †here for you or for who† you say*”

“I don't know. I hope so. Why otherwise*”

“Because from their fathers they have heard stories of other reformers, and legends of more or less 
perfect communities, and they believe this is that and that is this.”
“And so every movemen† inherits †he offspring of o†hers*”
“Of course, because the majority of those who flock after reformers are the simple, who have no 
subtlety of doctrine. And yet moral reform movements originate in different places and ways and 
with different doctrines. For example, the Cathqrists and the Wqldensians ctre often mixed up. But 
there is a great difference between them. The Waldensians preached a moral reform within the 
church, the Catharists preached a different church, a different view of God and morality. The 
Catharists thought the world was divided between the opposing forces of good and evil, and they had 
built a church in which the perfect were distinguished from simple believers, and they hqd their 
sacraments and their rites: they had built a very rigid hierarchy, almost like that of our own Holy 
Mother, and they didn‘t for a moment think of destroying every form of power. Which explains to you 
why men in command, landowners, feudal lords, also joined the Catharists. Nor did they think of 
reforming the world, because the opposition between good and evil for them can never be settled. 
The Waldensians, on the contrary (and along with them the Arnoldists, or Poor Lombards), wanted to 
construct a different world on an ideal of poverty, and this is why they received the outcasts and 
lived in community with the labor of their hands.”
“But why, then, are they confused and spoken of as the same evil weed*”
“I told you. what makes them live is also what makes them die. The movements grow, gathering simple 
people who have been aroused by other movements and who believe all have the same impulse of revolt 
and hope; and they are destroyed by the inquisitors, who attribute to one the errors of the other, 
and if †he sec†arians of one movemen† commi† a crime, †his crime will be o††ribu†ed †o each 
sectarian of each movement. The inquisitors are mistaken, rationally speaking, because they lump 
contradictory doctrines †oge†her; †hey are righ†, according †o o†hers’ irra†ionaIi†y, because when 
a movemen† of,


sqy, Arnoldis†s springs up in one ci†y, i† is swelled by †hose who would have been or have been 
Cotharists or Woldensians elsewhere. Fra Dolcino's Apostles preached the physical destruction of 
clerics and lords, and committed many acts of violence; the Waldensians are opposed to violence, 
and so are the Fraticelli. But I am sure that in Fra Dolcino's day there were many in his group who 
had previously followed the preachings of the Fraticelli or the Waldensians. The simple cqnnot 
choose their personal heresy, Adso; they cling to the mon preaching in their land, who passes 
through their village or stops in their square. This is what their enemies exploit. To present to 
the eyes of the people a single heresy, which perhaps may suggest at the same time the renunciation 
of sexual pleasure and the communion of bodies, is good preaching technique: it shows the heretics 
as one jumble of diabolical contradictions which offend common sense.”
“So there is no relationship among them, and it is the Devil‘s deception that mokes a simple man 
who would like to be a Joachimite or a Spiritual loll into the hands of the Cotharists, and vice 
versa*”

“No, that is not quite it. Let's try again from the beginning, Adso. But I assure you, I am 
attempting to explain to you something about which I myself am not sure I possess the truth. I 
think the mistake is to believe thqt the heresy comes first, and then the simple folk who join it 
(and damn themselves for i†). Actually, firs† comes †he condition of being simple, †hen †he 
heresy.”

“What do you mean*”

“You hove a clear conception of the people of God. A great flock-good sheep and bad sheep—kept in 
order by mastiffs—the warriors, or the temporal power—the Emperor, and the overlords, under the 
guidance of the shepherds, the clerics, the interpreters of the divine word. The picture is 
s†roigh†forward.”
“But false. The shepherds fight with the dogs, because each covets the rights of the other.” “True, 
and this is exactly whot mokes the nature of the flock unsure. Concerned as they ore with
tearing eqch other apqrt reciprocally, dogs and shepherds no longer tend the flock. A part of it is 
left outside.”

“What do you mean by outside*”

“On the mqrgin. Peasants: only they are not really peasants, because they have no land, or what 
land they have does not feed them. And citizens: only they are not citizens, because they do not 
belong to a guild or a corporation; they are the little people, prey of anyone. Have you sometimes 
seen groups of lepers in †he countryside*”

“Yes, once I saw a hundred together. Misshapen, their flesh decaying and all whitish, hobbling on 
their crutches, with swollen eyelids, bleeding eyes. They didn't speak or shout; they twittered, 
like mice.”

“For the Christian people they are the others, those who remain on the fringe of the flock. The 
flock hotes them, they hate the flock, who wish oll lepers like them would die.”


“Yes, I recall a story about King Mark, who had to condemn Isoldo the beautiful qnd was about to 
have her ascend the stake when the lepers came and said to the King that the stoke was a mild 
punishment and that there was a worse one. And they cried to him: Give us Isolda that she may 
belong to all of us, our illness enflames our desires, give her to your lepers. Look at our rags, 
glued to our groaning wounds. She, who at your side enjoyed rich stuffs lined with squirrel fur and 
jewels, when she sees the courtyard of the lepers, when she has to enter our hovels and lie with 
us, then she will truly recognize her sin and regret this fine pyre of brambles!”

“I see thot for a novice of Saint Benedict you have done some odd reading,” William remarked. I 
blushed, because I knew a novice should not read romances, but they circulated among us young 
people in the monastery of Melk and we read them at night by candlelight. “But that doesn't 
matter,” William continued, “you hove understood what I meant. The outcast lepers would like to 
drag everything down in their ruin. And they become all the more evil, the more you cast them out: 
and the more you depict them as a court of lemures who want your ruin, the more they will be 
outcast. Saint Francis realized this, and his first decision was to go and live among the lepers. 
The people of God cannot be changed until the outcasts are restored to its body.”
“But you were speaking of other outcasts; it isn‘t lepers who form heretical movements.”

“The flock is like a series of concentric circles, from the broadest range of the flock to its 
immediate surroundings. The lepers are a sign of exclusion in general. Saint Francis understood 
that. He didn't want only to help the lepers: if he had, his act would hove been reduced to quite a 
poor and impotent ac† of charity. He wan†ed †o signify something else. Have you been †oId abou† his 
preaching †o †he birds*”

“Oh, yes, I've heard that beautiful story, and I admired the saint who enjoyed the company of those 
tender creatures of God,” I said with great fervor.

“Well, what they told you wos mistaken, or, rather, it‘s a story the order has revised today. When 
Francis spoke to the people of the city and its magistrates and sqw they didn't understand him, he 
went out to the cemetery and begon preaching to ravens and magpies, to hawks, to roptors feeding on 
corpses.”
“What a horrible thing!” I said. “Then they were not good birds!”
“They were birds of prey, outcast birds, like the lepers. Francis was surely thinking of that verse 
of the Apocalypse that says: ’I saw an angel standing in the sun; and -he cried with a loud voice, 
saying to all the fowls thot fly in the midst of heaven, Come and gather yourselves together at the 
supper of the great God: that ye mcty eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of captains, and the 
flesh of • 9hty men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of all 
men, both free and bond, both small and great!‘ ”
“So Francis wanted to incite the outcasts to revolt*”

“No, that was what Fra Dolcino and his followers wanted, if anybody did. Francis wanted to call the 
ou†cas†, ready †o revol†, †o be par† of †he people of God. If †he flock was †o be gathered again, 
†he


outcasts had to be found again. Francis didn't succeed, and I say it with great bitterness. To 
recover the outcasts he had to act within the church, to act within the church he had to obtain the 
recognition of his rule, from which an order would emerge, and this order, as it emerged, would 
decompose the image of a circle, at whose margin the outcasts remain. So now do you understand why 
there are bands of Fraticelli and Joachimites who again gather the outcasts qround themselves*“

“Bu† we weren‘† talking abou† Francis; we were talking abou† how heresy is produced by †he simple 
and the outcast.”

“Yes. We were talking about those excluded from the flock of sheep. For centuries, as pope and 
emperor tore each other apart in their quarrels over power, the excluded went on living on the 
fringe, like lepers, of whom true lepers are only the illustration ordained by God to moke us 
understand this wondrous parable, so that in saying ‘lepers’ we would understand “outcast, poor, 
simple, excluded, uprooted from the countryside, humiliated in the cities: But we did not 
understand: the mystery of leprosy has continued to haun† us because we have no† recognized the 
nature of the sign. Excluded as they were from the flock, all of them were ready to hear, or to 
produce, every sermon thot, harking back †o †he word of Chris†, would condemn †he behavior of †he 
dogs and shepherds and would promise their punishment one day. The powerful always realized this. 
The recovery of the outcasts demanded reduction of the privileges of the powerful, so the excluded 
who became aware of their exclusion had to be branded as heretics, whatever their doctrine. And for 
their part, blinded by their exclusion, they were not really interested in any doctrine. This is 
the illusion of heresy. Everyone is heretical, everyone is orthodox. The faith a movement proclaims 
doesn't count: what counts is the hope it offers. All heresies are the banner of a reality, an 
exclusion. Scratch the heresy and you will find the leper. Every battle against heresy wants only 
this: to keep the leper as he is. As for the lepers, what can you ask of them* That they 
distinguish in the Trinitarian dogma or in the definition of the Eucharis† how much is correc† and 
how much is wrong* Come, Adso, †hese games are for us men of learning. The simple have other 
problems. And mind you, they solve them all in the wrong way. This is why they become heretics.”
“But why do some people support them*”
“Because it serves their purposes, which concern the faith rarely, and more often the conquest of
power.”
“Is that why the church of Rome accuses all its adversaries of heresy*”

“That is why, and that is also why it recognizes as orthodoxy any heresy it can bring back under 
its own control or must accept because the heresy has become too strong. But there is no precise 
rule: it depends on the individuals, on the circumstances. This holds true qlso for the secular 
lords.
Sometimes the city magistrates encourage the heretics to translate the Gospel into the vernacular: 
the vernacular by now is the language of the cities, Latin the language of Rome and the 
monasteries. And sometimes the magistrates support the Waldensians, because they declare that all, 
men and women, lowly and mighty, can teach and preach, and the worker who is a disciple after ten 
days hunts for another whose teacher he can become. ”


“And so they eliminate the distinction that makes clerics irreplaceable! But, then, why does it 
happen thot the some city magistrates rebel against the heretics and lend the church a hand in 
having them burned*”

“Because they rectlize the heretics' growth could jeopctrdize also the privileges of the laity who 
spectk in the vernacular. In the Lateran Council of 1179 (you see, these questions date back a 
hundred fifty years), Walter Map warned against what would happen if credence were given to those 
foolish and illiterate men the Waldensians. He said, if I recall properly, that they have no fixed 
dwelling, they go about barefoot and possess nothing, holding everything as common property, 
following naked the naked Christ; they begin in this very humble way because they are outcasts, but 
if you give them too much room they will drive out everyone else. This is why the cities favored 
the mendicant orders, and us Franciscans in particular: we fostered a harmonious balance between 
the need for penance and the life of the city, between the church and the burghers, concerned for 
their trade.  ”
“Was harmony achieved, then, between love of God and love of trade*”
“No, the movements of spiritual renewal were blocked; they were chqnneled within the bounds of an 
order recognized by †he Pope. Bu† who† circulated underneo†h wos no† channeled. I† flowed, on †he 
one hand, into the movements of the flagellants, who endanger no one, or into the armed bands like 
Fra Dolcino‘s, or in†o †he wi†chcraf† rituals of †he monks of Mon†efalco †ha† Ubertino was talking 
abou†. ”

“But who was right, who is right, who was wrong*” I asked, bewildered. “They were all right in 
their way, and all were mistaken.”
“And you,” I cried, in on access almos† of rebellion, “why don’† you †ake a position, why won’† you 
†elI me where the truth is*”

William remained silent for a while, holding the lens he was working on up to the light. Then he 
lowered
i† to the table and showed me, through the lens, a tool. “Look,” he soid to me. “Wha† do you see*”

“The tool, a bit larger.”
“There: the most we can do is look more closely.” “But the tool remains always the same!”
“The manuscript of Venantius, too, will remain the same when, thanks to this lens, I've been ctble 
to read it. But perhaps when I‘ve read the manuscript I'll know a port of the truth better. And 
perhaps we‘ll be able †o make †he life of †he abbey be††er.”
“But that isn't enough!”
“I'm saying more †han I seem †o be, Adso. This isn’† †he firs† †ime I‘ve spoken †o you of Roger 
Bacon. Perhaps he was not the wisest man of all time, but I've always been fascinated by the hope 
that


inspired his love of learning. Bacon believed in the strength, the needs, the spiritual inventions 
of the simple. He wouldn‘t have been o good Franciscan if he hadn't thought that the poor, the 
outcost, idiots and illiterate, often speak with the mouth of our Lord. The simple have something 
more than do learned doctors, who of†en become los† in †heir search for broad, general laws. The 
simple have a sense of the individual, but this sense, by itself is not enough. The simple grqsp a 
truth of their own, perhops truer than that of the doctors of the church, but then they destroy it 
in unthinking actions. What must be done* Give learning to the simple* Too easy, or too difficult. 
The Franciscan teachers considered this problem. The great Bonaventure said that the wise must 
enhance conceptual clarity with the truth implicit in the actions of the simple.  “

“Like the chapter of Perugia and the learned memories of Ubertino, which transform into theological 
decisions the summons of the simple to poverty,” I said.

“Yes, but as you have seen, this happens too late, and when it hctppens, the truth of the simple 
has already been transformed into the truth of the powerful, more useful for the Emperor Louis than 
for a Friar of the Poor Life. How ore we to remain close to the experience of the simple, 
maintaining, so to speak, their opercttive virtue, the capacity of working toward the 
transformation and betterment of their world* This was the problem for Bacon. ’Quod enim laicali 
ruditate turgescit non habet effectum nisi fortuito,‘ he said: The experience of the simple has 
savage and uncontrollable results. ’Sed opera sapientiae certa lege vallantur et in finem debitum 
efficaciter diriguntur.’ Which is to say that even in the handling of practical things, be they 
agriculture, mechanics, or the governing of a city, a kind of theology is required. He thought that 
the new natural science should be the great new enterprise of the learned: to coordinate, through a 
different knowledge of natural processes, the elementary needs that represented also the heap of 
expectations, disordered but in its way true and right, of the simple. The new science, the new 
natural magic. According to Bacon, this enterprise was to be directed by †he church, bu† I believe 
he said †his because in his †ime the community of clerics was identified with the community of the 
learned. Today that is no longer the case: learned men grow up outside the monasteries and the 
cathedrals, even outside the universities. So I think that, since I and my friends today believe 
that for the management of human affairs it is not the church that should legislate but the 
assembly of the people, then in the future the community of the learned will have to propose this 
new and humane theology which is natural philosophy and positive magic.”

“A splendid enterprise,” I said, “but is it possible*”

“Bacon thou9ht so.”
“And you*”

“I think so, too. But to believe in it we must be sure that the simple qre right in possessing the 
sense of the individual, which is the only good kind. However, if the sense of the individual is 
the only good, how will science succeed in decomposing the universal laws through which, and 
interpreting which, the good magic will become functional*”
“Yes,” I said, “how can it*”


“I no longer know. I have had arguments at Oxford with my friend William of Occam, who is now in 
Avignon. He has sown doubts in my mind. Because if only the sense of the individual is just, the 
proposition that identical causes have identical effects is difficult to prove. A single body can 
be cold or ho†, swee† or bi††er, we† or dry, in one place—and no† in another place. How can I 
discover †he universal bond †ha† orders all †hings if I canno† lif† q finger wi†hou† creating an 
infinity of new entities* For with such a movement all the relations of position between my finger 
and all other objects change. The relations are the ways in which my mind perceives the connections 
between single entities, but what is the guarantee that this is universal and stable*”
“But you know that a certain thickness of glass corresponds to a certain power of vision, and it is 
because you know †his †ha† now you can make lenses like †he ones you have los†: otherwise how could 
you*”

“An acute reply, Adso. In fact, I have worked out this proposition: equal thickness corresponds 
necessarily †o equal power of vision. I have posited i† because on o†her occasions I have had 
individual insights of the same type. To be sure, anyone who tests the curative property of herbs 
knows that individual herbs of the same species hctve equctl effects of the same nature on the 
pcttient, and therefore the investigator formulates the proposition thot every herb of a given type 
helps the feverish, or that every lens of such a type magnifies the eye‘s vision to the same 
degree. The science Bacon spoke of res†s unquestionably on †hese propositions. You understand, 
Adso, I mus† believe †ha† my proposition works, because I learned i† by experience: bu† †o believe 
i† I mus† assume †here are universal lows. Ye† I canno† speak of †hem, becouse †he very concep† 
†ho† universal laws and on established order exist would imply that God is their prisoner, whereas 
God is something absolutely free, so that if He wanted, with a single act of His will He could make 
the world different.”

“And so, if I understand you correctly, you qct, qnd you know why you act, but you don‘t know why 
you know †ha† you know wha† you do*”

I must say with pride thot William gave me a look of admirotion. “Perhaps thot's it. In any case, 
this tells you why I feel so uncertain of my truth, even if I believe in it.”
“You are more mystical than Ubertino!” I said spitefully.
“Perhaps. But as you see, I work on things of nature. And in the investigation we are carrying out, 
I don't want to know who is good or who is wicked, but who was in the scriptorium last night, who 
took the eyeglasses, who left traces of a body dragging another body in the snow, and where 
Berengar is. These are facts. Afterward I'll try to connect them—if it's possible, for it's 
difficult to say what effect is produced by what cause. An angel's intervention would suffice to 
change everything, so it isn't surprising that one thing cannot be proved to be the cause of 
another thing. Even if one must always try, as I am doing.”
“Yours is a difficult life,” I said.
“But I found Brunellus,” William cried, recalling the horse episode of two days before. “Then there 
is an order in the world!” I cried, triumphant.



"Then there is a bit of order in this poor head of mine,” William answered.
At this point Nicholas came back with an almost finished fork, holding it up victoriously.

"And when †his fork is on my poor nose,“ William said, “perhaps my poor heod will be even more 
orderly.“

A novice came to say the abbot wished to see William, and wos waiting for him in the garden. As we 
started off, William slapped his forehead, as if remembering only at this point something he had 
forgo††en.

"By the way," he said, "I've deciphered Venontius's cabolistic signs.” "All of them* When*“
“While you were asleep. And it depends on what you mean by ’qll.’ I've deciphered the signs that 
the flame caused to appear, the ones you copied out. The notes in Greek must wait till I have new 
lenses.“

"Well* Was it the secret of the finis Africae*”

"Yes, and the key was fairly easy. At his disposol Venantius had the twelve signs of the zodiac and 
eight other signs: for the five planets, the two luminaries, and the earth. Twenty signs in all. 
Enough to associate with them the letters of the Latin alphabet, since you can use the same letter 
to express the sound of the two initials of ’unum‘ ond ’velut.’ The order of the letters, we know. 
What could be
the order of the signs, then* I thought of the order of the heavens, placing the zodiacal quadrant 
at the far edge. So, then: Earth, Moon, Mercury, Venus, Sun, etc., and, afterward, the signs of the 
zodiac in their traditional sequence, as Isidore of Seville classifies them, beginning with Aries 
and the vernal equinox, ending with Pisces. Now, if you try this key, Venantius's message tokes on 
a meaning.“

He showed me the parchment, on which he had transcribed the message to big Latin letters: ‘Secretum 
finis Africae manus supra idolum age primum et septimum de quatuor.”

"Is that clear*” he asked.

“The hand over the idol works on the first and the seventh of the four ..." I repeated, shaking my 
head. “It isn't clear at all!”

“I know. First of qll we have to know what Venantius meant by 'idolum.‘ An image, q ghost, a 
figure* And then what can this 'four’ be that has a ’first‘ and a ’seventh’* And what is to be done 
with them* Move them, push them, pull them*”

“So we know nothing and we are still where we started,” I said, with great dismay.

William stopped and looked at me with an expression not entirely benevolent. "My boy,” he said, 
“you have before you a poor Franciscan who, with his modest learning and what little skill he owes 
to the


infinite power of the Lord, hqs succeeded in a few hours in deciphering a secret code whose author 
was sure would prove sealed to all save himself ... ond you, wretched illiterate rogue, dore say we 
are still where we started*“

I apologized very clumsily. I had wounded my master's vanity, and yet I knew how proud he wqs of 
the speed ond accuracy of his deductions. Williom †ruIy had performed a job wor†hy of odmira†ion, 
and i† was not his fault if the crafty Venantius not only had concealed his discovery behind an 
obscure zodiacal alphabet, but had further devised an undecipherable riddle.

“No matter, no matter, don't apologize,” William interrupted me. “After all, you're right. We still 
know too little. Come along.”

VESPERS
In which the abbot speaks ogain with the visitors, and William has some astounding ideas for 
deciphering the riddle of the labyrinth and succeeds in the most rational way. Then William and 
Adso eat cheese in batter.

The abbot was waiting for us with a grim, worried look. He was holding a paper in his hand.

“I hove just received a letter from the abbot of Conques,” he said. “He discloses the name of the 
man to whom John has entrusted the command of the French soldiers and the responsibility for the 
safety of the legation. He is not a man of arms, he is not a man of the court, and he will be at 
the same time a member of the legation.”

“A rare combination of different qualities,” William said uneasily. “Who is it*”

“Bernard Gui, or Bernordo Guidoni, whichever you choose to call him.”

William made an ejoculation in his own longuage that I didn't understand, nor did the abbot 
understand it, and perhaps it was best for us both, because the word William uttered had an obscene 
hissing sound.

“I don't like this,” he odded at once. “For years Bernard wqs the scourge of heretics in the 
Toulouse area, and he has wri††en a Prac†ica oficii inquisi†ionis here†ice pravi†a†is for †he use 
of †hose who must persecute and destroy Waldensians, Beghards, Fraticelli, and Dolcinians.”

“I know. I am familiar with the book; remarkably learned.”

“Remarkably learned,” William conceded. “He's devoted to John, who in recent years has assigned him 
many missions in Flanders and here in northern Italy. And even when he was named Bishop of Galicia, 
he was never seen in his diocese but continued his octivity as inquisitor. I thought he had now 
retired
†o †he bishopric of Lodéve, bu† apparently John is recalling him †o du†y, righ† here in northern 
I†aIy. But why Bernard, of all people, and why with a command of soldiers ...*”


“There is an answer,” the qbbot said, “and it confirms all the fears I expressed to you yesterday. 
You know well—even if you will not admit it to me—that the positions on the poverty of Christ and 
of the church sustained by the chapter of Perugia, though supported by an abundance of theological 
arguments, are the same ones that many heretical movements sustain, much less prudently and in a 
much less orthodox fashion. It does not take much to demonstrate that the positions of Michael of 
Cesena, espoused by the Emperor, ore the same as those of Ubertino and Angelus Clarenus. And up to 
this point, the two legations will concur. But Gui could do more, and he has the skill: he will try 
to insist that the theses of Perugia are the same as those of the Fraticelli, or the Pseudo 
Apostles.”

“This was foreseen. I mean, we knew that things would come to this, even without Bernard‘s 
presence. At most Bernard will act more effectively than so many of those inept men of the curia, 
and the debate with him will necessarily be more subtle.”

“Yes,” the abbot said, “but at this point we come up a9ainst the question raised yesterday. If by 
tomorrow we have no† discovered †he person guiI†y of †wo, perhaps †hree, crimes, I mus† allow 
Bernard to exercise control over the abbey‘s affairs. I cannot conceal from a mon invested with the 
power Bernard will have (and because of our mutual agreement, we must not forget) thctt here in the 
abbey inexplicable events have taken ploce, are still taking place. Otherwise, the moment he finds 
out, the moment (God forbid) some new mysterious event happens, he will have every right to cry 
betrayal.

“True,” William murmured, worried. “But there is nothing to be done. Perhaps it will be a good 
thing: Bernard occupied with the assassin will have less time to participate in the debate.”

“Bernard occupied with discovering the murderer will be o thorn in the side of my authority; 
remember that. This murky business obliges me for the first time to surrender q part of my power 
wi†hin †hese wolls, and i† is o new †urn in †he history no† only of †his abbey bu† of †he Cluniac 
order itself. I would do anything to avoid it. Where is Berengar* What has happened to him* What 
are you doing*”

“I am only a monk who, a long †ime ago, conducted some effective inquisi†oriaI inves†iga†ions. You 
know that the truth is not to be found in two days. And after all, what power have you granted me* 
May I enter the library* May I ask all the questions I'd like, always supported by your authority*”

“I see no connection between the crimes and the library,” the abbot said angrily.

“Adelmo was an illuminator, Venantius a translator, Berengar the assistant librarian ...” William 
explained patiently.

“In this sense all sixty monks have something to do with the library, as they hove with the church. 
Why not investigate the church, then* Brother William, you are conducting an inquiry at my behest 
and within the limits I have established. For the rest, within this girdle of walls I am the only 
master after God, and by His grace. And this will hold true for Bernord as well. In any event,” he 
added, in a milder tone, “Bernard may not necessarily be coming here specifically for the meeting. 
The abbot of Conquer writes me that the Pope has asked Cardinal Bertrand del Poggetto to come up 
from Bologna and assume command of the papal legation. Perhaps Bernard is coming here to meet the 
cardinal.”



“Which, in a broader perspective, would be worse. Bertrand is the scourge of heretics in central 
Italy. This encounter between the two champions of the battle against heretics may herald a vaster 
offensive in the country, eventually against the whole Franciscan movement. ”
“And of this we will promptly inform the Emperor,” the abbot said, “but in this case the danger 
would
no† be immediate. We will be aler†. Good-bye.”

William remained silent a moment as the abbot departed. Then he soid to me: “First of all, Adso, we 
must try not to let ourselves be overcome by haste. Things cannot be solved rapidly when so many 
small, individual experiences have to be put together. I am going back to the laboratory, because 
in addition to keeping me from reading the manuscript, being without my lenses also mokes it 
pointless for me to return †onigh† to the library.”

At that moment Nicholas of Morimondo came running toward us, bearer of very bad tidings. While he 
was trying to grind more finely the best lens, the one on which William had based such hope, it had 
broken. And another, which could perhaps have replaced it, had cracked qs he wqs trying to insert 
it into the fork. Nicholas, disconsolately, pointed to the sky. It wos already the hour of vespers, 
and darkness was falling. For that day no more work could be done. Another day lost, William 
acknowledged bitterly, suppressing (as he confessed to me afterward) the temptation to strangle the 
master glacier, though Nicholas was already sufficiently humiliated.
We left him to his humiliation and went to inquire about Berengar. Naturally, no one had found him.
We felt we had reached a dead end. We strolled awhile in the cloister, uncertain what to do next. 
But soon I saw William was lost in thought, staring into the air, as if he saw nothing. A bit 
earlier he had taken from his habit a twig of those herbs that I had seen him gather weeks before, 
and he was chewing it as if it gave him a kind of calm stimulus. In fact, he seemed absent, but 
every now and then his eyes brightened as if in the vacuum of his mind a new ideo had kindled; then 
he would plunge once more into thctt singular and active hebetude of his. All of a sudden he said, 
“Of course, we could ”
“What*” I asked.
“I was thinking of a way to ge† our bearings in the labyrinth. I† is no† simple, bu† i† would be 
effective.
.. After all, the exit is in the east tower: this we know. Now, suppose thctt we had a machine that 
tells us where north is. What would happen*”

“Naturally, we would hove only to turn to our right and we would be heading east. Or else it would 
suffice to go in the opposite direction and we would know we were going toward the south tower. 
But, even assuming such magic existed, the labyrinth is in fact a labyrinth, and as soon as we 
headed east we would come upon a wall that would prevent us from going straight, and we would lose 
our way again
.” I observed.
“Yes, but the machine I am tolking about would always point north, even if we had chonged our 
route, and at every point it would tell us which way to turn.”


“It would be marvelous. But we would have to have this machine, and it would have to be able to 
recognize north at night and indoors, without being able to see the sun or the stars.  And I 
believe
not even your Bacon possessed such a machine.” I laughed.
“But you are wrong,” William said, “because a machine of the sort has been constructed, and some 
navigators have used it. It doesn't need the stars or the sun, becouse it exploits the power of a 
marvelous stone, like the one we saw in Severinus's infirmary, the one that attracts iron. And it 
was studied by Bacon and by a Picard wizard, Pierre of Maricourt, who described its many uses.”

“But could you construct it*”

“In itself, that wouldn‘t be difficult. The stone can be used to produce mony wonders, including a 
machine thot moves perpetually without any external power, but the simplest discovery was described 
also by an Arab, Baylek aI-Qabayaki. Take a vessel filled with water and set afloat in it a cork 
into which you have stuck an iron needle. Then pass the magnetic stone over the surface of the 
water, until the needle has acquired the same properties as the stone. And at this point the 
needle—though the stone would also have done it if it had had the capacity to move around q 
pivot—will turn and point north, and if you move it with the vessel, it will always turn in the 
direction of the north wind.
Obviously, if you bear north in mind and also mark on the edge of the vessel the positions of east, 
south, and west, you will always know which way to turn in the library to reach the east tower.”

“Wha† a marvel!” I exclaimed. “Bu† why does †he needle always poin† nor†h* The s†one o††rac†s iron, 
I saw that, and I imagine that an immense quantity of iron attracts the stone. But then  then in 
the
direction of the polestar, at the extreme confines of the globe, there exist great iron mines!”

“Someone, in fact, has suggested such is the cqse. Except thqt the needle doesn't point precisely 
in the direction of the daystar, but toward the intersection of the celestial meridians. A sign 
that, as has been said, ’hic lapis gerit in se similitudinem coeli,‘ and the poles of the magnet 
receive their inclination from the poles of the sky, not from those of the earth. Which is a fine 
example of movement provoked qt q distance, not by direct material causality: q problem that my 
friend John of Jandun is studying, when the Emperor does not ask him to make Avignon sink into the 
bowels of the ear†h.  ”

“Let's go, then, and take Severinus‘s stone, and a vessel, and some water, and a cork ” I soid, 
excited.

“Wait a moment,” William said. “I do not know why, but I have never seen a machine that, however 
perfect in the philosophers' description, is perfect in its mechanical functioning. Whereas a 
peasant's billhook, which no philosopher has ever described, always functions as it should.  I‘m 
afraid that
wanderin9around the labyrinth with q lamp in one hand, a vessel full of wnter in the other  Wait,
though! I have another idea. The machine would point north even if we were outside the labyrinth,
would it not*”
“Yes, but at that point it would be of no use to us, becouse we would have the sun and the stars ” 
I
soid.


“I know, I know. But if the machine functions both indoors and outdoors, why should it not be the
some wi†h our heads*”

"Our heads* Of course, they also function outside, and in fact, on the outside we know quite well 
the layout of the Aedificium! But it is when we are inside that we. become disoriented!"
“Precisely. But forget the machine for now. Thinking about the machine has led me to think about 
natural laws and the laws of thought. Here is the point: we must find, from the outside, a way of 
describing the Aedificium as it is inside. “
"But how*“
“We will use the mathematical sciences. Only in the mathematical sciences, as Averroes soys, ore 
things known to us identified with those known absolutely.“

“Then you do admit universal notions, you see.”

"Ma†hema†icol notions are propositions cons†ruc†ed by our in†elIec† in such a way †ha† †hey 
function always as truths, either because they are innate or because mathematics was invented 
before the other sciences. And the library was built by a human mind that thought in a mathematical 
fashion, because wi†hou† ma†hema†ics you cqnno† build labyrinths. And therefore we mus† compare our 
mathematical propositions with the propositions of the builder, and from this comparison science 
can be produced, because it is a science of terms upon terms. And, in any case, stop dragging me 
into discussions of metaphysics. What the Devil has got into you today* Instead, you who have good 
eyes take a parchment, a tablet, something you can make signs on, and a stylus.  Good, you have it* 
Good
for you, Adso. Let's go and take a turn around the Aedificium, while we still have a bit of light.“
So we took a long turn around the Aedificium. That is, from the distance we examined the east, 
south, and west towers, with the walls connecting them. The rest rose over the cliff, though for 
reasons of symmetry it could not be very different from whqt we were seeing.

And what we saw, William observed as he made me take precise notes on my tablet, was that each wall 
had two windows, and each tower five.
“Now, think,” my master said to me. “Each room we sctw hctd a window. "
"Except those with seven sides,” I said.

“And, naturally, †hey are †he ones in the cen†er of each tower.”

“And except some others that we found without windows but that were not heptagonal.“

“Forget them. First let us find the rule, then we will try to explain the exceptions. So: we will 
have on the outside five rooms for each tower and two rooms for each straight wall, each room with 
a window. But if from a room with a window we proceed toward the interior of the Aedificium, we 
meet another


room with a window. A sign that there are internal windows. Now, what shape is the internal well, 
as seen from the kitchen and from the scriptorium*“

“Octagonal,” I said.

“Excellent. And on each side of the octagon, there could easily be two windows. Does this mean that 
for each side of the octagon there are two internal rooms* Am I right*”

“Yes, but what about the windowless rooms*”

“There are eight in all. In fact, the internal room of every tower, with seven sides, has five 
walls that open each into one of the five rooms of the tower. What do the other two walls confine 
with* Not with rooms set along the outside walls, or there would be windows, and not with rooms 
along the octagon, for the same reason and because they would then be excessively long rooms. Try 
to draw a plan of how †he library migh† look from above. You see †ha† in each †ower †here mus† be 
†wo rooms thot confine with the heptagonal room and open into two rooms that confine with the 
internal oc†agonqI well.”

I tried drawing the plan that my master suggested, and I let out a cry of triumph. “But now we know 
everything! Let me count.  The library has fifty-six rooms, four of them heptagonal and fifty-two
more or less square, and of these, there are eight without windows, while twenty-eight look to the 
outside and sixteen †o †he interior!”

“And the four towers each have five rooms with four walls and one with seven.  The library is
constructed occording to a celestial harmony to which various and wonderful meanings con be 
attributed. ”

“A splendid discovery” I said, “bu† why is i† so difficul† †o ge† our bearings*”

“Because what does not correspond to any mathematical law is the arrangement of the openings. Some 
rooms allow you to pass into several others, some into only one, and we must ask ourselves whether 
there are not rooms that do not allow you to go anywhere else. If you consider this aspect, plus 
the lack of light or of any clue that might be supplied by the position of the sun (and if you add 
the visions and the mirrors), you understond how the lobyrinth can confuse anyone who goes through 
it, especially when he is already troubled by a sense of guilt. Remember, too, how desperate we 
were lqst night when we could no longer find our way. The maximum of confusion achieved with the 
maximum of order: it seems a sublime calculation. The builders of the library were great masters.”

“How will we orient ourselves, then*”

“At this point it isn't difficult. With the map you've drawn, which should more or less correspond 
to the plan of the library, as soon as we are m the first heptagonal room we will move immediately 
to reach one of the blind rooms. Then, always turning right, after two or three rooms we should 
agoin be in a †ower, which can only be †he nor†h †ower, un†iI we come †o another blind room, on †he 
lef†, which will confine with the heptagonal room, and on the right will allow us to rediscover a 
route similar to what I have just described, until we arrive at the west tower.”



“Yes, if all the rooms opened into all the other rooms ...”

“In fact. And for this reason well need your map, to mark the blank walls on it, so we'll know what 
detours were making. But it won't be difficult.”
“But are we sure it will work*” I asked, puzzled; it all seemed too simple to me.

It will work, William replied. “But unfortunately we don‘t know everything yet. We hove learned how 
to avoid being lost. Now we must know whether there is a rule governing the distribution of the 
books among the rooms. And the verses from the Apocalypse tell us very little, not least because 
many are repeated identically in different rooms. ”
“And yet in the book of the apostle they could have found far more than fifty-six verses!”
“Undoubtedly. Therefore only certain verses ore good. Strange. As if they had had fewer than fifty: 
thirty or twenty  Oh, by the beard of Merlin!”

“Of whom*”

“Pay no attention. A magician of my country  They used as many verses as there are letters in the
alphabet! Of course, thot‘s it! The text of the verse doesn't count, it‘s the initial letters that 
count. Each room is marked by a letter of the alphabet, and all together they make up some text 
that we must discover!”
“Like ct figured poem, in the form of a cross or a fish!”
“More or less, and probably in the period when the library was built, that kind of poem was much in 
vogue.”

“But where does the text begin*”
“With a scroll larger than the others, in the heptagonal room of the entrance tower ... or else  
Why,
of course, with the sentences in red!” “But there are so many of them!”
“And therefore there must be many texts, or many words. Now make a better and larger copy of your 
map; while we visit the library, you will mark down with your stylus the rooms we pass throu9h, the 
positions of the doors and walls (as well as the windows), and also the first letters of the verses 
that appear there. And like a good illuminator, you will make the letters in red larger.”

“Bu† how does i† happen,” I said wi†h odmira†ion, “†ho† you were able †o solve †he mystery of †he 
library looking a† i† from †he outside, and you were unable †o solve i† when you were inside*”



“Thus God knows the world, because He conceived it in His mind, es if from the outside, before it 
was
created, and we do no† know its rule, because we live inside i†, hoving found i† already made.”

“So one can know things by looking at them from the outside!”

“The creations of art, because we retrace in our minds the operations of the artifices. Not the 
creations of nature, because they are not the work of our minds.”

“But for the library this suffices, doesn't it*”

“Yes,” William said. “But only for the library. Now let‘s go and rest. I can do nothing until 
tomorrow morning, when I will have, I hope, my lenses. We might as well sleep, and rise early. I 
will try to reflec†.”

“And supper*”

“Ah, of course, supper. The hour has passed by now. The monks qre already at compline. But perhaps 
the kitchen is still open. Go look for something.”
“And steal it*”

“Ask. Ask Salvatore, who is now your friend.” “But he will steal!”
“Are you perhaps your brother's keeper*” William qsked, with the words of Cain. But I saw he wqs 
joking and meant to say that God is great and merciful. And so I went looking for Salvatore ond 
found him near the horses' stalls.

“A fine qnimal,” I sqid, nodding at Brunellus, as q way of starting a conversation. “I would like 
to ride
him.”
“No se puede. Abbonis est. But you do not need a pulcher horse to ride hard. ” He pointed out a
sturdy but ill-favored horse. “That one also suficit. .. Vide illuc, tertius equi. ”

He wanted to point out to me the third horse. I laughed at his comical Latin. “And what will you do 
with that one*” I asked him.

And he told me a strange story. He said that any horse, even the oldest and weakest animal, could 
be made as swift as Brunellus. You had only to mix into his outs an herb called sotirion, chopped 
fine, and then grease. his thighs with stag fat. Then you mount the horse, and before spurring him 
you turn his face eastward and you whisper into his ear, three times, the words: “Nicander, 
Melchior, and Merchizord,” And the horse will dash off and will go as far in one hour as Brunellus 
would in eight. And if you hang around his neck the teeth of a wolf thot the horse himself has 
trampled and killed, the animal will not even feel the effort.


I asked him whether he had ever tried this. He sqid to me, coming closer circumspectly and 
whispering into my ear with his really foul breath, that it was very difficult, because satirion 
was now cultivated only by bishops and by †heir lordly friends, who used i† †o increase †heir 
power. Then I pu† an end †o his talk and told him that this evening my master wanted’ to read 
certain books in his cell and wished to eat up there.
“I will do,“ he said, “I will do cheese in batter.“ “How is thot made*”
"Focilis. You take the cheese before it is too antiquum, without too much salis, and cut in cubes 
or sicut you like. And posteo you put a bit of butierro or lordo to rechauffer over the embers. And 
in it you put two pieces of cheese, and when it becomes tenero, zuchorum et cinnamon supra 
positurum du bis. And immediately †ake †o †able, because i† mus† be a†e caldo caldo."

“Cheese in batter it is, then,” I said to him. And he vanished toward the kitchen, telling me to 
wait for him. He arrived hqlf an hour later with q dish covered by a cloth. The qroma was good.
“Here,” he said to me, and he also held out a great lamp filled with oil. "What for*” I asked.
“Sais pas, moi,” he said, slyly. “Peut-etre your magister wants to go in dark place esta noche.“

Salvatore apparently knew more things than I had suspected. I inquired no further, but took the 
food to William. We ate, and I withdrew to my cell. Or at least, so I implied. I wqnted to find 
Ubertino again, ond steolthily I returned to the church.

AFTER COMPLINE
In which Ubertino tells Adso the story of Fra Dolcino, after which Adso recalls other stories or 
reads them on his own in the library, and then he has an encounter with a maiden, beautiful and 
terrible as an army arrayed for ba††Ie.

I found Ubertino at the statue of the Virgin. Silently I joined him and for a while pretended (I
confess) †o pray. Then I made bold †o speak †o him.

“Holy Father,” I said to him, “may I qsk enlightenment and counsel of you*"
Ubertino looked at me and, taking me by the hand, rose and led me to a bench, where we both sat. He 
embraced me †igh†Iy, and I could feel his brea†h on my face.

"Dearest son,” he said, “anything this poor sinner can do for your soul will be done joyfully. What 
is distressing you* Yearnings*“ he asked, almost with yearning himself. "The yearnings of the 
flesh*”


"No,” I replied, blushin9, “if anything the yearnings of the mind, which wants to know too many 
things

"And that is bad. The Lord knows all things, and we must only adore His knowledge.”
"But we must also distinguish good from evil ond understand human possions. I am a novice, but I 
will be monk and priest, and I must learn where evil lies, and what it looks like, in order to 
recognize it one day and teach others to recognize it.”

“This is †rue, my boy. Wha† do you wan† to know, †hen*”

“The tare of heresy, Father,“ I said with conviction. And then, all in one breath, “I have heard 
tell of a wicked man who has led others ostroy: Fra Dolcino.“

Ubertino remained silent, then he said: "That is right, you heard Brother Williom ond me refer to 
him the other evening. Bu† i† is a nasty story, and i† grieves me to talk abou† i†, because i† 
teaches (yes, in this sense you should know it, to derive a useful lesson from it)—because, I was 
saying, it teaches how
†he love of penance and †he desire †o purify †he world con produce bloodshed and slough†er.” He 
shifted his position on the bench, relaxing his grasp of my shoulders but still keeping one hand on 
my neck, as if to communicate to me his knowledge or (I could not tell) his intensity.

"The story begins before Fra Dolcino,” he soid, "more than sixty years ago, when I was a child. I† 
was in Parma. There a certain Gherardo Segarelli began preaching, exhorting all to a life of 
penitence, and he would go along the roads crying ’Penitenziagite!‘ which was the uneducated man‘s 
way of saying ’Penitentiam agite, appropinquabit enim regnum coelorum.’ He enjoined his disciples 
to imitate the apostles, and he chose †o call his sec† †he order of †he Apostles, and his men were 
†o go through †he world like poor beggars, living only on alms.  ”
"Like the Fraticelli," I said. “Wasn't this the command of our Lord and of your own Francis*“

"Yes,” Ubertino admitted with a slight hesitotion in his voice, sighing. “gut perhaps Gherordo 
exaggerated. He and his followers were accused of denying the authority of the priests and the 
celebration of Mass and confession, and of being idle vagabonds.“

“But the Spiritual Franciscans were accused of the sctme thing. And aren't the Minorites 
sayin9today that the authority of the Pope should not be recognized*”

“Yes, but not the authority of priests. We Minorites are ourselves priests. It is difficult, boy, 
to moke distinctions in these things. The line dividin9good from evil is so fine.  In some way 
Gherardo erred
and became guiI†y of heresy. ... He asked †o be admi††ed †o †he order of †he Minori†es, bu† our
brothers would not receive him. He spent his days in the church of our brothers, and he saw the 
paintings there of the apostles wearing sandals on their feet and cloaks wrapped around their 
shoulders, and so he let his hair and beard grow, put sandals on his feet, and wore the rope of the 
Friars Minor, because anyone who wan†s †o found a new congregation always †okes something from †he 
order of the Blessed Francis.“


“Then he was in the 9ht. ”
“But somewhere he did wrong.  Dressed in a white cloak over a white tunic, with his hair long, he
acquired among simple people the reputation for saintliness. He sold a little house of his, and 
having received the money, he stood on a stone from which in ancient times the magistrcttes were 
ctccustomed to harangue, and he held the little sack of gold pieces in his hand, and he did not 
scatter them or give them to the poor, but, after summoning some rogues dicing nearby, he flung the 
money in their midst and said, ‘Let him take who will,’ and those rogues took the money and went 
off to gamble it away, and they blasphemed the living God, and he who had given to them heard and 
did not blush.”

“But Francis also stripped himself of everything, and today from William I heard that he went to 
preach to ravens and hawks, as well as to the lepers—nomely, to the dregs thot the people who call 
themselves virtuous had cast out. ”

"Yes, but Gherordo somehow erred; Francis never set himself in conflict with the holy church, and 
the Gospel says to give to the poor, not to rogues. Gherardo gave and received nothing in return 
because he hqd given †o bad people, and he had a bqd beginning, a bad con†inua†ion, and a bqd end, 
because his congregation was disopproved by Pope Gregory †he Ten†h.
“Perhaps,” I said, “he was a less broad-minded pope than the one who approved the Rule of Francis. 
”
“He was, but Gherardo somehow erred, and Francis, on the contrary, knew well what he was doing. And 
finally, boy, these keepers of pigs and cows who suddenly became Pseudo Apostles wanted to live 
blissfully and without sweat off the alms of those whom the Friars Minor had educated with such 
efforts and such heroic examples of poverty! But that is not the point,” he odded promptly. “The 
point is thctt to resemble the ctpostles, who had still been Jews, Gherardo Segarelli had himself 
circumcised, which is contrary †o †he words of Paul †o †he Galatians—and you know †ha† many holy 
persons proclaim that the future Antichrist will come from the race of the circumcised.  But 
Gherardo did still worse:
he went about collecting the simple people and saying, ‘Come with me into the vineyard,’ and those 
who did not know him went with him into ctnother's vineyard, believing it his, qnd they ctte 
another's grapes.

“Surely the Minorites didn‘t defend private property,” I said impertinently.
Ubertino stared at me severely. “The Minorites ask to be poor, but they have never asked others to 
be poor. You cannot attack the property of good Christians with impunity: the good Christians will 
label you a bandit. And so it happened to Gherardo. They said of him finally that to test his 
strength of will and his continence he slept with women without having carnal knowledge of them: 
but when his disciples tried to imitate him, the results were quite different.  Oh, these qre not 
things a boy
should know: the female is a vessel of the Devil.  And then they begon to brawl among themselves
over the command of the sect, and evil things happened. And yet many came to Gherardo, not only 
peasants, but also people of the city, members of the guilds, and Gherardo made them strip 
themselves so that, naked, they could follow the naked Christ, and he sent them out into the world 
to preach, but he had a sleeveless tunic mode for himself, white, of strong stuff, and in this garb 
he looked more like a clown than like a religious! They lived in the open air, but sometimes they 
climbed into the pulpits of the churches, disturbing the assembly of devout folk and driving out 
their


preachers, and once they set a child on the bishop‘s throne in the Church of Sant'Orso in Ravenna. 
And
†hey proclaimed themselves heirs of †he doctrine of Joachim of Floris. .. “

"But so do the Franciscans,” I said, "and also Gerard of Borgo San Donnino, and you, too!” I cried.
"Colm yourself, boy. Joachim of Floris was a greo† prophe† and he was †he firs† †o understand †ho† 
Francis would begin a renewal of the church. But the Pseudo Apostles used his doctrine to justify 
their follies. Segarelli took with him a female apostle, one Tripia or Ripia, who claimed to have 
the gift of prophecy. A woman, you understand*”

"But, Father,” I tried to counter, "the other evening you yourself spoke of the saintliness of 
Clare of Montefalco and Angela of Foligno. ”

“They were saints! They lived in humility, reco9Flizingthe power of the church: they never claimed 
the gif† of prophecy! Bu† the Pseudo Apostles asserted †ho† women could go preaching from city to 
city, as many other heretics also said. And they recognized no difference among the wed and the 
unwed, nor wets any vow considered perpetual. In short, not to weary you too much with very sad 
stories whose subtleties you cannot understand well, Bishop Obizzo of Parma finally decided to put 
Gherardo in irons. But here a strange thing happened that tells you how weak is human nature, and 
how insidious
the weed of heresy. Because in the end the bishop freed Gherardo and received him at his own table, 
and laughed at his japes, and kept him as his buffoon.”
"But why*"
“I do not know—or, rather, I fear I do know. The bishop was a nobleman and did not like the 
merchants and craftsmen of the city. Perhaps he did not mind Gherardo's preaching against them with 
his †oIk of poverty, or did no† care †ha† from begging for alms Gherardo proceeded †o robbery. gu† 
in the end the Pope. intervened, and the bishop resumed his proper seventy, and Gherardo ended on 
the pyre as on impenitent heretic. It was at the beginning of this century.”
"And what do these things have to do with Fra Dolcino*”
"They are connected, and this shows you how heresy survives even the destruction of the heretics. 
This Dolcino was a priest's bastard, living in the Novaro diocese, this part of Italy, a bit 
farther north. He was a youth of sharp mind and he was educated in letters, but he stole from the 
priest who housed him and fled eastward, to the city of Trent. And there he resumed the preaching 
of Gherardo, but in
a more heretical vein, declaring that he was the only true apostle of God and that everything 
should be common in love, and thot it was licit to lie indiscriminately with all women, whereby no 
one could be accused of concubinnge, even if he went with both q wife and a daughter. ”
“Did he truly preach those things, or was he just accused of preaching them* I have heard that the 
Spirituals, like those monks of Montefalco, were accused of similar crimes. “

"De hoc satis,” Ubertino interrupted me sharply. “They were no longer monks. They were heretics. 
And befouled by Fra Dolcino himself. And, furthermore, listen to me: it is enough to know what Fra 
Dolcino did afterward to call him a wicked man. How he became familiar with the Pseudo Apostles' 
teachings, I


do not even know. Perhaps he went through Pqrma as a youth and heard Gherardo. It is known that in 
the Bologna region he kept in touch with those heretics ofter Segarelli's death. And it is known 
for certain that he began his preaching at Trent. There he seduced a very beautiful maiden of noble 
family, Margaret, or she seduced him, as Héloise seduced Abelard, because—never forget—it is 
through womqn that the Devil penetrates men's hearts! At thqt point, the Bishop of Trent drove him 
from the diocese, but by then Dolcino had gathered more than a thousand followers, ond he began a 
long march, which took him back to the area where he was born. And along the way other deluded folk 
joined him, seduced by his words, and perhaps he was also joined by many Waldensian heretics who 
lived in the mountoins he passed through, or he himself wanted to join the Woldensians of these 
londs to the north. When he reached the Novara region, Dolcino found a situation favorable to his 
revolt, cause the vassals governing the town of Gattinara in the name of the Bishop of Vercelli had 
been driven out by the populace, who then welcomed Dolcino's outlaws as their worthy allies.”
“What had the bishop‘s vassals done*”

“I do not know, and it is not my place to judge. But as you see, heresy in many cases is wed to the 
revolt against overlords, and this is why the heretic begins by preaching Madonna Poverty and then 
falls prey to all the temptations of power, war, violence. There wos a conflict among certain 
fomilies in the city of Vercelli, and the Pseudo Apostles took advantage of it, and these families 
exploited the disorder brought by the Pseudo Apostles. The feudal lords hired mercenaries to rob 
the citizens, and
†he citizens sough† †he pro†ec†ion of †he Bishop of Novara.”
“What a complicated story. But whose side was Dolcino on*”

“I do not know; he was a faction unto himself: he entered into all these disputes and saw them as 
on opportunity for preaching the struggle against private ownership in the nctme of poverty. 
Dolcino and his followers, who were now three thousand strong, camped on a hill near Novara known 
as Bald Mountain, and they built hovels and fortifications, and Dolcino ruled over that whole 
throng of men and women, who lived in the most shameful promiscuity. From there he sent letters to 
his faithful in which he expounded his heretical doctrine. He said and he wrote thqt their ideql 
wqs poverty and they were no† bound by any vow of external obedience, and †ho† he, Dolcino, had 
been sen† by God †o break the seals of the prophecies and to understand the writings of the Old and 
the New Testaments. And he called secular clerics—preachers and Minorites—ministers of the Devil, 
and he absolved everyone from the duty of obeying them. And he identified four ages in the life of 
the people of God: The first was thctt of the Old Testament, the patriarchs and prophets, before 
the coming of Christ, when marriage was good because God‘s people had to multiply. The second was 
the age of Christ and the apostles, and this was the epoch of saintliness and chastity. Then came 
the third, when the popes had first to accept earthly riches in order to govern the people: but 
when mankind begon to stray from the love of God, Benedict came, and spoke against ctll temporal 
possessions. When the monks of Benedict also then went back to accumulating wealth, the monks of 
Saint Francis and Saint Dominic came, even more stern than Benedict in preaching against earthly 
power and riches. But finally now, when again the lives of so many prelates were contradicting all 
those good precepts, we had reached the end of the third age, and it was necessary to follow the 
teachings of the Apostles.”

“Then Dolcino was preaching the things that the Franciscans had preached, and among the 
Franciscans, the Spirituals in particular, and you yourself, Father!”



"Ah, yes, but he derived a perfidious syllogism from them! He said that to bring to an end this 
third age of corruption, all the clergy, monks, and friars had to die a very cruel death; he said 
that all prelates of the church, all clerics, nuns, religious male and female, all those who belong 
to the preaching orders and the Minorites, the hermits, and even Boniface the Pope had to be 
exterminated by †he Emperor he, Dolcino, had chosen, and †his was †o be Frederick of Sicily.”

"But didn't that same Frederick receive with favor in Sicily the Spirituals expelled from Umbria, 
and isn't it the Minorites who osk that the Emperor, though he is now Louis, destroy the temporal 
power of the Pope and the cardinals*“

“It is characteristic of heresy, or of madness, that it transforms the most upright thoughts and 
aims them at consequences contrary to the low of God ond man. The Minorites have never osked the 
Emperor to kill other priests.

He was mistaken, I know now. Because, a few months later, when the Bavarian established his own 
order in Rome, Marsilius ctnd o†her Minorites did †o religious who were faithful †o †he Pope 
exactly what Dolcino had asked to have done. By this I don't mean that Dolcino was right: if 
anything, Marsilius was equally wrong. But I was beginning to wonder, especially after that 
afternoon‘s conversation with William, if it were possible for the simple people who followed 
Dolcino to distinguish between the promises of the Spirituals and Dolcino's enactment of them. Wqs 
he not perhaps guilty of putting into practice wha† presumably orthodox men had preached, in a 
purely mystical fashion* Or was †ho† perhaps where the difference lay* Did holiness consist to 
waiting for God to give us what His saints had promised, without trying to obtain it through 
earthly means* Now I know this is the case and I know why Dolcino was in error: the order of things 
must not be transformed, even if we must
fervently hope for its transformcttion. But thctt evening I was in the grip of contradictory 
thoughts.
“Finally,“ Ubertino was saying to me, “you always find the mark of heresy in pride. In a second 
letter, to the year 1303, Dolcino appointed himself supreme head of the Apostolic congregation, and 
named as his lieutenants the perfidious Margaret—a woman—and Longinus of Bergqmo, Frederick of 
Novctra, Albert Carentinus, and Walderic of Brescia. And he began roving about a sequence of future 
popes, two good—the first and the last—and two wicked, the second and the third. The first is 
Celestine, the second is Boniface the Eighth, of whom the prophets say, ’The pride of your heart 
has dishonored you, O you who live in the fissures of cliffs.‘ The third Pope is not named, but of 
him Jeremiah is supposed
to have said, 'There, like a lion.‘ And—infamy!— Dolcino reco9niZed the lion in Frederick of 
Sicily. For Dolcino the fourth Pope was still unknown, and he was to be the Sainted Pope, the 
Angelic Pope of whom †he abbo† Joachim spoke. He would be chosen by God, and †hen Dolcino and all 
his people (who a† this point were already four thousand) would receive together the grace of the 
Holy Spirit, and it would renew the church until the end of the world. But in the three years 
preceding his comin9, all evil would hove to be consummated. And this Dolcino tried to do, carrying 
war everywhere. And the fourth pope, and here you see how the Devil mocks his familiars, was in 
fact Clement the Fifth, who proclaimed the crusade against Dolcino. And it was right, because in 
his letters at this point Dolcino
sustained theories †ha† could no† be reconciled wi†h orthodoxy. He declared †he Roman church a
whore, said that obedience is not due priests, that all spiritual power had now passed to the sect 
of
†he Apostles, †ha† only †he Apostles represented †he new church, †he Apostles could annul 
ma†rimony, no one would be saved unless he was a member of †he sec†, no pope could absolve sin, 
†i†hes should no†


be paid, a more perfect life was lived without vows than with vows, qnd a consecrated church was 
worthless for prayer, no better than a stable, and Christ could be worshiped both in the woods and 
in
†he churches.“
“Did he reqlly say these things*”
“Of course, this is certain. He wrote them. But unfortunately he did still worse. After he had 
settled on Bald Mountain, he began sacking the villages in the valley, raiding them to procure 
provisions— waging outright war, in short, agoinst the nearby towns.”

“Were all opposed †o him*”

“We do not know. Perhaps he received support from some: I told you that he had involved himself in 
the snarled knot of local dissensions. Meanwhile winter had come, the winter of the year 1305, one 
of the harshest in recent decodes, and there was great famine all around. Dolcino sent a third 
letter to his followers, and many more joined him, but on that hill life had become intolerable, 
and they otter so hungry that they qte the flesh of horses and other animals, and boiled hay. And 
many died.”
“But whom were they fighting against now*”

“The Bishop of Vercelli had appealed to Clement the Fifth, and a crusade had been called against 
the heretics. A plenary indulgence was granted to anyone taking part in it, and Louis of Savoy, the 
inquisitors of Lombardy, the Archbishop of Milan were prompt to act. Many took up the cross to aid 
the people of Vercelli and Novara, even from Savoy, Provence, France; and the Bishop of Vercelli 
was the supreme commander. There were constant clashes between the vanguards of the two armies, but 
Dolcino's fortifications were impregnable, and somehow the wicked received help.”
“From whom*”

“From other wicked men, I believe, who were hctppy to foment this disorder. Towctrd the end of the 
year 1305, the heresiarch was forced, however, to abandon Bold Mountain, leaving behind the wounded 
and ill, and he moved into the territory of Trivero, where he entrenched himself on a mountain that 
was called Zubello a† †he †ime and Ia†er was known as Rubello or Rebello, because i† had become †he 
fortress of the rebels of the church. In any case, I cannot tell you everything that hoppened. 
There were terrible massacres, but in the end the rebels were forced to surrender, Dolcino and his 
people were captured, and they rightly ended up on the pyre.”
“The beautiful Margaret, too*”
Ubertino looked at me, “So you remembered she was beautiful* She was beautiful, they say, and mony 
local lords tried to make her their bride to save her from the stake. But she would not have it; 
she died impenitent with her impenitent lover. And let this be a lesson to you: beware of the whore 
of Babylon, even when she assumes the form of the most exquisite creature.”

“But now tell me., Father: I have learned that the cellarer of the convent, and perhaps also 
Salvatore, me† Dolcino and were wi†h him in some way. ”



“Be silent! Do not utter rash statements. I found the cellarer in a convent of Minorites. I do not 
know where Remigio had been before that. I know he was always a good monk, at least from the 
standpoint of orthodoxy. As for the rest, alas, the flesh is weak. ”
“What do you mean*”
“These are not things you should know.” He drew me close again, embracing me and pointing to the 
statue of the Virgin. “You must be introduced to the immaculate love. There is she in whom 
femininity is sublimated. This is why you may call her beautiful, like the beloved in the Song of 
Songs. In her,” he said, his face carried away by an inner rapture, like the abbot's the day before 
when he spoke of gems and the gold of his vessels, “in her, even the body's grace is a sign of the 
beauties of heaven, and this is why the sculptor has portrayed her with all the graces that should 
adorn a woman.” He pointed to the Virgin‘s slender bust, held high and tight by a cross-laced 
bodice, which the Child's tiny hands fondled. “You see* As the doctors have soid Beautiful also are 
the breasts, which protrude slightly, only faintly tumescent, and do not swell licentiously, 
suppressed but not depressed.  What do you
feel before this sweetest of visions*”
I blushed violently, feeling myself stirred as if by an inner fire. Ubertino must have realized it, 
or perhaps he glimpsed my flushed cheeks, for he promptly added, “But you must learn to distinguish 
the fire of supernatural love from the raving of the senses. It is difficult even for the saints.”
“But how can the good love be recognized*” I asked, trembling.
“What is love* There is nothing in the world, neither mon nor Devil nor any thing, that I hold as 
suspect as love, for it penetrcttes the soul more than any other thing. Nothing exists that so 
fills and binds †he hear† as love does. Therefore, unless you hove †hose weapons †ho† subdue i†, 
†he soul plunges through love into an immense abyss. And I believe that without Margaret’s 
seductions Dolcino would not have damned himself, and without the reckless and promiscuous life on 
Bold Mountain, fewer would hctve felt the lure of his rebellion. Mind you, I do not say these 
things to you only about evil love, which of course all must shun as a thing of the Devil: I say 
this also, and with great fear, of the good love between God and man, between man and his neighbor. 
It often happens that two or three people, men or women, love one another quite cordially and 
harbor reciprocal, special fondness, and desire to live always close, and what one party wishes, 
the other desires. And I confess that I felt something of the kind for most virtuous women, like 
Angeles and Clare. Well, thctt, too, is blameworthy, even though it is spiritual and conceived in 
God's name.  Because even the love felt by the soul, if it is not
forearmed, if it is felt warmly, then falls, or proceeds in disorder. Oh, love has various 
properties: first the soul grows tender, then it Dickens  but then it feels the true warmth of 
divine love and
cries out and moans and becomes cs stone flung in the forge to melt into lime, and it crackles, 
licked by the flame. ”
“And this is good love*”
Ubertino stroked my head, and as I looked at him, I saw his eyes melt with tears. “Yes, this, 
finally, is good love.” He took his hand from my shoulder. But how difficult it is,“ he added, “how 
difficult it is to distinguish it from the other. And sometimes when devils tempt your soul you 
feel like the man hanged



by †he neck who, wi†h his hands tied behind him and his eyes blindfolded, remains hangin9 oil †he 
gallows and yet lives, with no help, no support, no remedy, swinging in the empty air. “

His face was bathed not only with tears but also by a faint perspiration. “Go now,” he said to me 
quickly. “I have told you what you wanted to know, On this side the choir of angels; on that, the 
gaping maw of hell. Go, and the Lord be praised.” He prostrated himself again before the Virgin, 
and I heard him sobbing softly. He was praying.

I did not leave the church. The talk with Ubertino had kindled in my spirit, and in my viscera, a 
strange fire and an unspeakable restlessness. Perhaps for this reason, I felt inclined to 
disobedience and decided to return to the library alone. I myself didn't know what I was looking 
for. I wanted to explore on unknown place on my own; I was fascinated by the idea of being able to 
orient myself there without my master's help. I climbed the stairs as Dolcino had climbed up Monte 
Rubello.

I had the lamp with me (why had I brought it—was I perhaps already harboring this secret plan*) and 
I entered the ossarium almost with my eyes closed. In no time I was in the scriptorium. It was a 
fatal evening, I believe, becctuse as I wets wondering among the desks, I glimpsed one on which lay 
an open manuscript that a monk had been copying: Historia fratris Dulcini Heresiarche. I believe it 
was the desk of Peter of Sant’AIbano, who I had been told was writing a monumental history of 
heresy (after what happened in the abbey, he naturally gave up writing it—but we must not get ahead 
of the story). So i† wqs therefore normal †ha† †he †ex† should be †here, and wi†h i† o†hers on 
kindred subjects, on the Patarines and the flagellonts. But I took this circumstance as a 
supernatural sign, whether celestial or diabolical I still cannot say, and I bent eagerly to read 
the writing. It was not very long, and I found †here also wha† Ubertino had no† †oId me, obviously 
recounted by one who had seen all and whose imagination was still inflamed by it.

I learned then how, in March of 1307, on Holy Saturday, Dolcino, Margaret, and Longinus, captured 
at last, were taken into the city of Biella and handed over to the bishop, who was awaiting the 
decision of the Pope. The Pope, hearing the news, transmitted it to King Philip of France, writing: 
“We hove received most welcome news, rich in joy and exultation, for that pestiferous demon, son of 
Beliql, the most horrendous heresiarch Dolcino, after many dangers, long efforts, massacres, and 
frequent battles, is finally incarcerated with his followers in our prisons, thanks to our 
venerated brother Ranier, Bishop of Vercelli, captured on the day of the Lord's holy supper; and 
numerous people who were with him, infected by the contogion, were killed that some day.” The Pope 
was merciless toward the prisoners and ordered the bishop to put them to death. Then, in July of 
that sctme year, the first day of the month, the heretics were handed over to the secular arm. As 
the bells of the city rang joyously, the heretics were placed in a wagon, surrounded by the 
executioners, followed by the militia, and carried through the entire city, and at every corner, 
men with red-hot pincers tore the flesh of the guilty. Mctrgaret wets burned first, before Dolcino, 
who did not move a muscle of his face, just es he had no† u††ered a moon when †he pincers bi† in†o 
his limbs. Then †he wagon continued on i†s way, while the executioners thrust their irons into pots 
filled with glowing coals. Dolcino underwent other torments and remained silent, though when they 
amputated his nose he shrugged a bit, and when they tore off his male member he emitted a long 
sigh, like a groan. The lost things he soid sounded impertinent, for he warned that he would rise 
on the third day. Then he was burned and his ashes were scattered in the wind.


I folded the manuscript with trembling hqnds. Dolcino had committed many crimes, I had been told, 
bu† he had been horribly burned †o dea†h. And o† †he s†ake he had behaved ... how* Wi†h †he 
steadfastness of martyrs or with the arrogance of the damned* As I staggered up the steps to the 
library, I realized why I was so upset. I suddenly recalled a scene I had witnessed not many months 
before, shortly after my arrival in Tuscany. I wondered, indeed, why I had almost forgotten it till 
then, as if my sick soul had wanted to erase a memory thot weighed on me like a nightmare. Or, 
rather, I had not forgotten it, because every time I heard the Fraticelli discussed, I saw again 
the scenes of that event, but I immediately thrust them down into the recesses of my spirit, as if 
witnessing that horror had been a sin.

I hod first heard talk of the Fraticelli in the days when, in Florence, I had seen one burned at 
the stoke. I† was shortly before I me† Brother William in Pisa. He had delayed his arrival in †ha† 
city, and my father had given me leave to visit Florence, whose churches I had heord praised as 
most beautiful. I wandered about Tuscany, to learn better the vulgar Italian tongue, and I finally 
stayed a week in Florence, because I had heard much talk of that city and wished to know it.

And so it was thctt when I had bctrely arrived I learned of a great trial that was stirring up the 
whole ci†y. A heretic Fra†icello, accused of crimes agains† religion and haled before †he bishop 
and o†her ecclesiastics, was being subjected to severe inquisition at the time. And, following 
those who told me about it, I went to the place where the trial was taking place, for I heard the 
people say that this friar, Michael by name, was truly a very pious man who had preached penance 
and poverty, repeating the words of Saint Francis, and had been brought before the judges because 
of the spitefulness of certain women who, pretending to confess themselves to him, had then 
attributed heretical notions to him; and he had indeed been seized by the bishop‘s men in the house 
of those same women, a fact that amazed me, because a mon of the church should never go to 
administer the sacraments in such unsuitable places; but this seemed to be ct weakness of the 
Fraticelli, this failure to tqke propriety into due consideration, and perhaps there was some truth 
in the popular belief that held them to be not only heretics but also of dubious behavior (as it 
was always said of the Catharists that they were Bulgars and sodomites).

I came to the Church of San Salvatore, where the inquisition was in progress, but I could not 
enter, because of the great crowd outside it. However, some had hoisted themselves to the bars of 
the windows and, clinging there, could see and hear what was going on, and they reported it to 
those below. The inquisitors were reading to Brother Michael the confession he had made the day 
before, in which he said thqt Christ and his apostles "held nothing individually or in common as 
property,” but Michael protested that the notary had now added “many false consequences“ and he 
shouted (this I heard from outside), "You will have to defend yourselves on the day of judgment!” 
But the inquisitors read the confession as they had drawn it up, and at the end they asked him 
whether he wanted humbly to follow the opinions of the church qnd all the people of the city. And I 
hectrd Michael shouting in a loud voice that he wanted to follow what he believed, namely thot he 
“wanted to keep Christ poor and crucified, and Pope John XXII was a heretic because he said the 
opposite.“ A great debate ensued, in which the inquisitors, many of them Franciscans, sought to 
make him understand that the Scriptures had not said what he was saying, and he accused them of 
denying the very Rule of their order, and they assailed him, asking him whether he thought he 
understood Scripture better than they, who were masters. And Fra Michael, very stubborn indeed, 
contested them, so that they began provoking him with such assertions as "Then we want you to 
consider Christ a property owner and Pope John a


Catholic and holy man.” And Michael, never faltering, soid, “No, a heretic.” And they said they had 
never seen anyone so tenacious in his own wickedness. Bu† among †he crowd outside †he building I 
heard many compare him to Christ before the Pharisees, and I realized that among the people many 
believed in the holiness of the friar Michael.

Finally the bishop‘s men took him back to prison in irons. And that evening I was told that many 
monks, friends of the bishop, had gone to insult him and enjoin him to retract, but he answered 
like a man sure of his own truth. And he repeated to each of them that Christ was poor and that 
Saint Francis and Saint Dominic had said so as well, and thot if for professing this upright 
opinion he had to be condemned to the stake, so much the better, because in a short time he would 
be able to see what the Scriptures describe, the twenty-four elders of the Apocalypse and Jesus 
Christ and Saint Francis and the glorious martyrs. And I was told that he said, “If we read with 
such fervor the doctrine of certain jointed abbots, how much greater should be our fervor and our 
joy in desiring to be in their midst*” And after words of this sort, the inquisitors left the 
prison with grim faces, crying out in indignation (and I heard them), “He has a devil in him!”

The next dqy we learned that the sentence had been pronounced; I went to the bishop's palace, where 
I could see the porchment, and I copied a part of it onto my tablet.

It began “In nomine Domini amen. Hec est quedam condemnatio corporalis et sententia condemnationis 
corporalis lqta, data et in hiis scriptis sententialiter pronumptiata et promulgata. ” etc., and it 
went
on with a stern description of the sins ond crimes of the said Michael; among these one seemed to 
me most foul, even if I do not know (considering the conduct of the trial) whether he really 
affirmed this, but it was said, in short, that the afore-mentioned Minorite had proclaimed that 
Saint Thomas
Aquinas was not a saint nor did he enjoy eternal salvation, but wos, on the contrary, damned ond in 
a stqte of perdition! And the sentence concluded, establishing the punishment, since the accused 
would not mend his ways:

Idcirco, dictum Johannem vocatum frotrem Micchoelem hereticum et scismaticum quod ducatur ad locum 
iustitie consuetum, et ibidem igne et flammis igneis qccensis concremetur et comburatur, ita quod 
peni†us moria†ur e† animo o corpore separe†ur.

And after the sentence had been made public, more men of the church came to the prison and warned 
Michoel of wha† would hoppen, ond I heard †hem say †hen, “Brother Michael, †he mi†ers ond copes 
hove already been made, and painted on them are Fraticelli accompanied by devils.” To frighten him 
and force him finally to retract. But Brother Michael knelt down and said, “I believe that beside 
the pyre there will be our father Francis, and I further believe there will be Jesus and the 
apostles, and the glorious mortyrs Bartholomew ond Anthony.” Which was a way of refusing for the 
lost time the inquisitors' offers.

The next morning I, too, was on the bridge before the bishop's palace, where the inquisitors had 
gathered; Brother Michael, still in irons, was brought to face them. One of his faithful followers 
knelt before him to receive his benediction, and this follower was seized by the men-at-arms and 
taken at once to prison. Afterward, the inquisitors agoin read the sentence to the condemned mon 
and asked him once more whether he wished to repent. AT every point where the sentence said he was 
a heretic Michael replied, “I am no heretic; a sinner, yes, but Catholic,” and when the text named 
"the most


venerctble and holy Pope John XXII" Michael answered, “No, a heretic.” Then the bishop ordered 
Michael †o come and kneel before him, and Michael said no one should kneel before heretics. They 
forced him to his knees and he murmured, “God will pardon me.” And after he had been led out in all 
his priestly vestments, a ritual began, and one by one his vestments were stripped away until he 
remained in thqt little garment that the Florentines call q “cioppa.” And as is the custom when a 
priest is defrocked, they seared the pads of his fingers with a hot iron and they shaved his head. 
Then he was handed over to the captain and his men, who treated him very harshly and put him in 
irons, to take him back to prison, as he said to the crowd, “Per Dominum moriemur.” He was to be 
burned, as I found out, only the next day. And on this day they also went to ask him whether he 
wished to confess himself and receive communion. And he refused, saying it was a sin to accept the 
sacraments from one in a state of sin. Here, I believe, he was wrong, and he showed he had been 
corrupted by the heresy of the Patarines.

Finally it was the day of the execution, and a gonfalonier came for him, appearing friendly, for he 
asked what sort of man Michael was ond why he was so stubborn when he had only to affirm what the 
whole populace affirmed and accept the opinion of Holy Mother Church. But Michael, very harshly, 
sqid, “I believe in Christ poor and crucified.” And the gonfalonier went away, mqking a helpless 
gesture. Then the captain arrived with his men and took Michoel into the courtyord, where the 
bishop's vicar reread the confession and the sentence to him. Michael interrupted again to contest 
opinions falsely attributed to him; these truly were matters of such subtlety that I do not recall
them, and at that time did not understand them clearly. But these were surely what decided the 
death of Michael and the persecution of the Fraticelli. I did not understand why the men of the 
church and of the secular arm were so violent against people who wanted to live in poverty and held 
that Christ had not owned worldly goods. Because, I said to myself, if anything, they should fear 
men who wish to live in weolth and take money away from others, and lead the church into sin ond 
introduce simoniocal practices into it. And I spoke of this with a man standing near me, for I 
could not keep silent any more. He smiled mockingly and said †o me †ha† a monk who practices 
poverty se†s a bad exomple for the populace, for then they cannot accept monks who do not practice 
it. And, he added, the preaching of poverty put the wrong ideas into the heads of the people, who 
would consider their poverty a source of pride, qnd pride can lead to many proud acts. And, 
finally, he said that I should know, thanks
†o some syllogism which wos no† clear †o him, ei†her, †ha† preaching poverty for monks pu† you on 
†he side of the Emperor, and this did not please the Pope. All excellent reasons, they seemed to 
me, even if expounded by a man of scant learning, except that at this point I did not understand 
why Brother Michoel wanted to die so horribly to please the Emperor, or to settle a controversy 
among religious orders. And in fact some of those present were saying, “He is not a saint, he was 
sent by Louis to stir up discord among †he citizens, and †he Fra†icelli are Tuscans bu† behind †hem 
are †he Emperor's agents.” And others said, “He is a madman, he is possessed by the Devil, swollen 
with pride, and he enjoys martyrdom for his wicked pride: they make these monks read too many lives 
of the saints, it would be better for them to take a wife!” And still others added, “No, all 
Christians should be like him, ready to proclaim their foith, as in the time of the pagans.” As I 
listened to those voices, no longer knowing what to think myself, it so happened that I looked 
straight at the condemned man‘s face, which at times was hidden by the crowd ahead of me. And I saw 
the face of a man looking at something that is not of this earth, as I had sometimes seen on 
stotues of saints in ecstatic vision.
And I understood that, madmon or seer as he might be, he knowingly wanted to die becouse he 
believed that in dying he would defeat his enemy, whoever it was. And I understood that his example
would lead others to death. And I remain amazed by the possessors of such steadfastness only


because I do not know, even today, whether whqt prevails in them is a proud love of the truth they 
believe, which leads them to deoth, or a proud desire for death, which leads them to procloim their 
truth, whatever it may be. And I am overwhelmed with admiration and fear.
But let us go back to the execution, for now all were heading for the place where Michael would be 
put
†o dea†h.
The captain and his men brought him out of the gate, with his little skirt on him and some of the 
buttons undone, ond as he walked with a broad stride ond a bowed head, reciting his office, he 
seemed one of the martyrs. And the crowd was unbelievably large and many cried, "Do not die!" and 
he would answer, "I want to die for Christ.” "But you are not dying for Christ,” they said to him; 
and he said, “No, for the truth.“ When they come to a place called the Proconsul's Corner, one man 
cried to him to pray to God for them all, and he blessed the crowd.

At the Church of the Baptist they shouted to him, "Save your life!" and he answered, "Run for your 
life from sin!“; at the Old Market they shouted to him, "Live, live!” and he replied, “Save 
yourselves from hell”: ctt the New Market they yelled, "Repent, repent,” and he replied, “Repent of 
your usury.“ And on reaching Santa Croce, he saw the monks of his order on the steps, and he 
reproached them because they did not follow the Rule of Saint Francis. And some of them shrugged, 
but others pulled their cowls over their faces to cover them, in shame.

And going toward the Justice Gate, many soid to him, "Recant! Recant! Don't insist on dying,” and 
he said, "Christ died for us.” And they said, “But you are not Christ, you must not die for us!” 
And he said, "But I want to die for Him.” At the Field of justice, one said to him he should do as 
a certain monk, his superior, had done, abjuring; but Michael answered that he would not abjure, 
and I saw many in the crowd, ctgree and urge Michctel to be strong: so I ctnd many others realized 
those were his followers, and we moved away from them.

Finally we were outside the city and before us the pyre appeared, the "hut," as they called it 
there, because the wood was arranged in the form of a hut, and there a circle of ctrmed horsemen 
formed, to keep people from coming †oo close. And †here †hey bound Brother Michael †o †he s†ake. 
And ogain I heard someone shout to him, “But what is it you're dying for*” And he answered; “For a 
truth that dwells in me, which I can proclaim only by dea†h.” They se† fire †o †he wood. And 
Brother Michael, who had chanted the "Credo,” afterward chanted the "Te Deum." He sang perhaps 
eight verses of it, then he bent over as if he had to sneeze, and fell to the ground, because his 
bonds hqd burned qway. He was already dead: before the body is completely burned it has already 
died from the great heat, which makes the heart explode, and from the smoke that fills the chest.

Then the hut burned entirely, like a torch, and there was q great glow, qnd if it had not been for 
the poor charred body of Michael, s†iII glimpsed among †he glowing cools, I would have said I was 
standing before the burning bush. And I was close enough to have a view (I recalled as I climbed 
the steps of the library) that made some words rise spontaneously to my lips, about ecstatic 
rapture: I had read them in the books of Saint Hildegard: “The flame consists of a splendid 
clarity, of an unusual vigor, and of an igneous ardor, but possesses the splendid clarity that it 
may illuminate and the igneous ardor that it may burn.“


I remembered some words of Ubertino about love. The imctge of Michael on the pyre became confused 
with that of Dolcino, and thot of Dolcino with that of the beautiful Margaret. I felt again the 
restlessness that had seized me in church.
I tried not to think about it qnd headed straight for the labyrinth.
This was the first time I entered it alone; the long shadows cast by the lamp on the floor 
terrified me as much as had the visions the previous night. At every moment I feared I would find 
myself before another mirror, because the mogic of mirrors is such thot even when you know they are 
mirrors they s†iII upse† you.

On the other hand, I did not try to orient myself, or to avoid the room with the perfumes that 
induce visions. I proceeded as if in the grip of a fever, nor did I know where I wanted to go. In 
fact, I did not move far from my starting point, because a short time later I found myself again in 
the heptagonal room by which I had entered. Here, on a †abIe, some books were laid ou† †ha† I did 
no† seem †o have seen the night before. I guessed they were works that Malachi had withdrawn from 
the scriptorium and had not yet replaced on their proper shelves. I could not comprehend how far I 
was from the perfume room, because I fel† dazed, which could be †he effec† of some effluvium †ha† 
reached even that spot, or else of the things I had been pondering until then. I opened a richly 
illuminated volume that, by its style, seemed to me to come from the monasteries of Ultima Thule.

On a page where †he holy Gospel of †he apostle Mark began, I was s†ruck by †he image of a lion. I 
was certain it was a lion, even though I had never seen one in the flesh, and the artist had 
reproduced its features faithfully, inspired perhaps by the sight of the lions of Hibernia, land of 
monstrous creatures, and I was convinced thot this animal, as for that matter the Physiologus says, 
concentrates in itself all the chctracteristics of the things at once most horrible and most regal. 
So that imctge suggested to me both the image of the Enemy and that of Christ our Lord, nor did I 
know by what symbolic key I was to read it, and I was trembling all over, out of fear and also 
because of the wind coming through the fissures in the walls.

The lion I saw had a mouth bristling with teeth, and a finely armored head like a serpent's; the 
immense body was supported by four paws with sharp, fierce claws, and its coat resembled one of 
those rugs that later I saw brought from the Orient, with red and emerald scales on which were 
drawn, yellow as the plague, horrible and sturdy armatures of bone. Also yellow was the tail, which 
twisted from the rump to the head, ending in a final scroll of black and white tufts.

I was already quite awed by the lion (and more than once I had looked around as if I expected to 
see an animal of that description suddenly appear) when I decided to look at other pages and my eye 
fell, at the openin9of the Gospel of Matthew, on the image of a man. I do not know why, but it 
frightened me more than the lion: the face was a mon's, bu† this man was sheathed in a kind of 
stiff chasuble †ha† covered him to his feet, and this chasuble, or cuirass, was encrusted with red 
and yellow semiprecious
stones. The head, which emerged enigmatically from a castle of rubies and topazes, seemed (how 
blasphemous terror made me!) that of the mysterious murderer whose impolpable trail we were 
following. And then I realized why I linked the animal and the armored man so closely with the 
labyrinth: both illustrations, like all in that book, emerged from a pattern of interlocking 
labyrinths, whose lines of onyx and emerald, threads of chrysoprase, ribbons of beryl seemed all to 
refer to the


tangle of rooms and corridors where I was. My eye becctme lost, on the page, along gleamin9paths, 
as my fee† were becoming los† in †he †roubIous succession of †he rooms of †he library, and seeing 
my own wandering depicted on those parchments filled me with uneasiness and convinced me that each 
of those books was telling, through mysterious cachinnations, my present story. “De to fabula 
narratur,” I said to myself, and I wondered if those pages did not already contain the story of 
future events in
store for me.
I opened another book, and this seemed of the Hispanic school. The colors were violent, the reds 
suggested blood or fire. It was the book of Revelation of the apostle, and once again, as the night 
before, I happened upon the page of the mulier amicta sole. But it was not the same book; the 
illumination was different. Here the artist had dwelled at greater length on the woman's form. I 
compared her face, her bosom, her curving thighs with the statue of the Virgin I had seen with 
Ubertino. The line was different, but this mulier also seemed very beautiful to me. I thought I 
should not dwell on these notions, and I turned several more pages. I found another woman, but this 
time it was †he whore of Babylon. I was no† so much s†ruck by her form as by †he †hough† †ha† she, 
†oo, was a woman like the other, and yet this one was the vessel of every vice, whereas the other 
was the receptacle of every virtue. But the forms were womanly in both cases, and ctt ct certain 
point I could no longer understand what distinguished them. Again I felt an inner agitation: the 
image of the Virgin in
†he church became superimposed on †ha† of †he beautiful Margate†. “I am damned!” I said †o myself. 
Or, “I am mad.” And I decided I should leave the library.
Luckily I was near the staircase. I rushed down, at the risk of stumbling and extinguishing the 
lamp. I found myself again under the broad vaults of the scriptorium, but I did not linger even 
there, and hurled myself down the stairs leading to the refectory.
Here I paused, gasping. The light of the moon came through the windows, very radiant, and I hardly 
needed the lamp, which would hove been indispensable for cells and for passages of the library.
Nevertheless, I kept it burning, as if to seek comfort. But I was still breathless, and I decided I 
should drink some water to calm my tension. Since the kitchen was near, I crossed the refectory and 
slowly opened one of the doors that led into the second hqlf of the ground floor of the Aedificium.
And at this point my terror, instead of lessening, increased. Because I immediately realized 
someone else was in the kitchen, near the bread oven—or at least I realized a light was shining in 
that corner. Filled with fear, I blew mine out. Frightened as I was, I instilled fright, and in 
fact the other person (or persons) immediately put out their light, too. But in vain, because the 
moonlight illuminated the kitchen sufficiently to cast before me one or more confused shadows on 
the floor.
Frozen, I did not dare draw back, or advance. I heard a stammering sound, and I thought I heard, 
softly, a woman‘s voice. Then from the shapeless group thctt could be discerned va9uelynear the 
oven, a dark, squat form broke away and fled toward the outside door, evidently left ajar, closing 
it after himself.
I remained, on the threshold between refectory and kitchen, and so did a vague something near the 
oven. A vague and—how to say i†*—moaning something. From the shadows, in lac†, came a groan, a kind 
of subdued weeping, rhythmic sobs of fear.


Nothing gives q fearful man more courage than another‘s fear, but it was not feqr that impelled me 
toward the shadow. Rather, I would say, I was driven by an intoxication not unlike the one that had 
gripped me when I was having visions. In the kitchen there was something kin to the fumes that had 
overcome me in the library the night before. It was perhaps not the same substance, but on my 
overexcited senses it hqd the sqme effect. I sniffed a pungent smell of traganth, slum, and tartar, 
which cooks use to make wine aromotic. Or perhaps, os I learned loter, in those days they were 
brewing beer (which in that northern part of the peninsula was held in some esteem), and it was 
prepared with the method of my country, with heather, swamp myrtle, and wild rosemary. All spices
†ho† in†oxica†e more †han my nostrils, my mind.

And while my rational instinct was to cry out "Vade retro!” and get away from the moaning thing 
that was certainly a succubus summoned for me by the Evil One, something in my vis oppetitiva urged 
me forward, as if I wanted to take port to some marvel.
And so I approached the shadow, until, in the moonlight that fell from the high windows, I reolized 
thot it was a woman, trembling, clutching to her breast one hand holding a package, and drawing 
back, weeping, toward the mouth of the oven.

May God, the Blessed Virgin, and all the saints of paradise assist me in telling what then 
happened. Modesty, the dignity of my position (as an aged monk by now, in this handsome monastery 
of Melk, a haven of peace and serene meditation), would counsel me to take the most devout 
precautions. I should simply say that something evil took place and that it would not be meet to 
tell what it was, and so I would upset neither my reader nor myself.

But I have determined to tell, of those remote events, the whole truth, and truth is indivisible, 
it shines with its own transpctrency and does not allow itself to be diminished by our interests or 
our shame. The problem is, rather, of telling what happened not as I see it now and remember it 
(even if I still remember everything with pitiless vividness, nor do I know whether my subsequent 
repentance has so fixed in my memory these situations and thoughts, or whether the inadequacy of 
†ho† some repentance still torments me, resuscitating in my oppressed mind the smallest details of 
my shame), bu† as I saw i† and fel† i† then. And I con do so with the fidelity of a chronicler, for 
if I close my eyes I can repeat not only everything I did but also what I thought in those moments, 
as if I were copying a parchment written at the time. I must therefore proceed in this way, Saint 
Michael Archangel protect me, because for the edification of future readers and the flaying of my 
guilt I wont now to tell how a youn9man con succUmb †o †he snares of †he Devil, †ha† †hey may be 
known and eviden†, so anyone
encountering them in the future may defeat them.

So, it was a woman. Or, rather, a girl. Having had until then (and since then, God be thanked) 
little intimacy with creatures of thqt sex, I cannot say what her age may have been. I know she was 
youn9, almost adolescent, perhaps she had passed sixteen or eighteen springs, or perhaps twenty; 
and I was struck by the impression of human reality that emanated from that form. It was not a 
vision, and in any case it seemed to me valde bona. Perhaps because she was trembling like a little 
bird in winter, and was weeping, and was afraid of me.


Thinking that the duty of every good Christian is to succor his neighbor, I approached her with 
greqt gentleness and in good Lotin told her she should not fear, because I was o friend, in any 
case not on enemy, certainly not the enemy she perhaps dreaded.

Because of the meekness of my gaze, I imagine, the creature grew calm and came to me. I sensed that 
she did not understand my Latin and instinctively I addressed her in my German vernacular, and this 
frightened her greatly, whether because of the harsh sounds, unfamiliar to the people of those 
parts, or because those sounds reminded her of some other experience with soldiers from my lands, I 
cannot soy which. Then I smiled, considering thot the language of gestures and of the face is more 
universal than that of words, and she was reassured. She smiled at me, too, and said a few words.

I knew her vernacular very slightly; it was different from the bit I had learned in Piso, but I 
realized from her tone that she was saying sweet words to me, and she seemed to be saying something 
like “You are young, you are handsome. " It is rare for a novice who has spent his whole childhood 
in a
monastery †o hear declarations of his beau†y; indeed, we are regularly admonished †ha† physical 
beauty is fleeting and must be considered base. But the snares of the Enemy are infinite, and I 
confess thctt this reference to my comeliness, though mendacious, fell sweetly on my ears and 
filled me with an irrepressible emotion. Especially since the girl, in saying this, had extended 
her hand until the tips of her fingers grazed my cheek, then quite beardless. I felt a kind of 
delirium, but at that moment I was unable to sense any hint of sin in my heart. Such is the force 
of the Devil when he wants to try us and dispel from our spirit the signs of grqce.

What did I feel* What did I see* I remember only that the emotions of the first moment were bereft 
of any expression, because my tongue and my mind had not been instructed in how to name sensations 
of thot sort. Until I recalled other inner words, heard in another time and in other places, spoken 
cer†ctinly for o†her ends, bu† which seemed wondrously in keeping wi†h my joy in †ha† momen†, as if 
†hey had been born consubs†an†ially †o express i†. Words pressed in†o †he caverns of my memory rose 
to the (dumb) surface of my lips, and I forgot that they had served in Scripture or in the pages of 
the saints to express quite different, more radiant realities. But was there truly a difference 
between the delights of which the sqints hctd spoken and those that my ctgitated spirit was feeling 
at thot moment* At that moment the watchful sense of difference was annihilated in me. And this, it 
seems to me, is precisely the sign of rapture in the abysses of identity.

Suddenly the girl appeared to me as the black but comely virgin of whom the Song of Songs speaks. 
She wore ct threadbctre little dress of rough cloth that opened in a fctirly immodest fashion over 
her bosom, and around her neck was a necklace made of little colored stones, very commonplace, I 
believe. But her head rose proudly on a neck as white as an ivory tower, her eyes were clear as the 
pools of Heshbon, her nose was as the tower of Lebanon, her hair like purple. Yes, her tresses 
seemed to me like a flock of goctts, her teeth like flocks of sheep coming up from their bath, all 
in pairs, so that none preceded its companion. And I could not help murmuring: "Behold, thou art 
fair, my love; behold, thou art fair. Thy hair is as a flock of goats that lie along the side of 
Mount Gilead; thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, thy temples are like a piece of a pomegranate, 
thy neck is like the tower of David whereon there hang a thousand bucklers.“ And I asked myself, 
frightened and rapt, who was she who rose before me like †he dawn, beautiful as †he moon, rodian† 
as †he sun, †erribiIis u† cos†orum acies ordinata.


Then the creature came still closer to me, throwing into ct corner the dark package she had till 
then held pressed to her bosom; and she raised her hand to stroke my face, and repeated the words I 
had already heard. And while I did not know whether to flee from her or move even closer, while my 
head was throbbing as if †he †rumpe†s of Joshua were abou† †o bring down †he walls of Jericho, as I 
yearned and ctt once feared to touch her, she smiled with great joy, emitted the stifled moan of a 
pleased she-goat, and undid the strings that closed her dress over her bosom, slipped the dress 
from her body like a tunic, and stood before me as Eve must have appeared to Adam in the garden of 
Eden. “Pulchra sunt ubera quae paululum supereminent et tument modice,” I murmured, repeating the 
words I had heard from Ubertino, because her breasts appeared to me like two fawns that ore twins 
of a roe, feeding among the lilies, her navel was a goblet wherein no mingled wine is wanting, her 
belly a heap of wheat set about with lilies.

“O sidus clarum pellorum,” I cried to her, “o porta clausa, forts hortorum, cella custos 
unguentorum, celia pigmentaria!” Inadvertently I found myself against her body, feeling its warmth 
and the sharp perfume of unguents never known before. I remembered, “Sons, when mad love comes, man 
is powerless!” and I understood thot, whether what I felt was a snare of the Enemy or a gift of 
heaven, I was now powerless against the impulse that moved me, qnd I cried, “Oh langueo,” qnd, 
“Causqm languoris video nec coveo!,” olso because o rosy perfume breathed from her lips and her 
fee† were beautiful in sandals, and her legs were like columns and jewels were the joints of her 
thighs, the work of the hands of a cunning workman. O love, daughter of delights, a king is held 
captive in your tresses, I murmured to myself, and I was in her arms, and we fell together onto the 
bare floor of the kitchen, and, whether on my own initiative or through her wiles, I found myself 
free of my novice‘s habit and we felt no shame at our bodies and cuncta erant bona.

And she kissed me with the kisses of her mouth, and her loves were more delicious than wine and her 
ointments had q goodly fragrance, qnd her neck was beautiful among pearls and her cheeks among 
earrings, behold thou art fair, my beloved, behold thou art fair; thine eyes are as doves (I said), 
and let me see thy face, let me hear thy voice, for thy voice is harmonious and thy face 
enchanting, thou host ravished my heart, my sister, thou hast ravished my heart with one of thine 
eyes, with one chain of thy neck, thy lips drop qs the honeycomb, honey qnd milk are under thy 
tongue, the smell of thy brea†h is of apples, †hy †wo breasts ore clusters of grapes, †hy paIa†e o 
heody wine †ha† goes s†raigh† to my love and mows over my lips and teeth.  A fountain sealed, 
spikenard and saffron, calamus and
cinnamon, myrrh and aloes, I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey, I have drunk my wine with my 
milk. Who was she, who was she who rose like the dawn, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, terrible 
as an army with banners*

O Lord, when the soul is transported, the only virtue lies in loving what you see (is that not 
true*), the supreme happiness in having what you hove; there blissful life is drunk at its source 
(has this not been sctid*), there you savor the true life that we will live after this mortal life 
among the angels for ctll eternity. ... This is what I was thinking and it seemed to me the 
prophecies were being fulfilled at last, as †he girl lavished indescribable sweetness on me, and i† 
was as if my whole body were an eye, before and behind, and I could suddenly see all surrounding 
things. And I understood that from it, from love, unity and tenderness are created together, as are 
good and kiss and fulfillment, as I had already heard, believing I was being told about something 
else. And only for an instant, as my joy was about to reach its zenith, did I remember that perhaps 
I was experiencing, and at night, the possession of the noon†ime Devil, who was condemned finally 
†o reveal himself in his †rue, diabolical na†ure †o †he soul


thot in ecstasy asks “Who are you*," who knows how to grip the soul and delude the body. But I was 
immediately convinced thot my scruples were indeed devilish, for nothing could be more right and 
good and holy than what I was experiencing, the sweetness of which grew with every moment. As a 
little drop of water added to a quantity of wine is completely dispersed and takes on the color and 
taste of wine, as red-hot iron becomes like molten fire losing its original form, as air when it is 
inundated with the sun's light is transformed into total splendor and clarity so that it no longer 
seems illuminated but,
ro†her,seems†o beligh†i†se|f,so I fe|†myselfdie offender lquefocton,ond I hod only†he strength left 
to murmur the words of the psalm: "Behold my bosom is like new wine, sealed, which bursts new 
vessels,” and suddenly I saw a brilliant light ond in it a saffron-colored form which flamed up in 
a sweet and shining fire, and that splendid light spread through all the shining fire, and this 
shining fire through that golden form and that brilliant light and that shining fire through the 
whole

As, half fainting, I fell on the body to which I had joined myself, I understood in a last vital 
spurt thot flame consists of a splendid clarity, an unusual vigor, and an igneous ardor, but it 
possesses the splendid clarity so that it may illuminate and the igneous ardor thot it may burn. 
Then I understood the abyss, and the deeper abysses thqt it conjured up.

Now that, with a hand that trembles (either in horror at the sin I am recounting or in guilty 
nostalgia of the event I recall), I write these lines, I realize that to describe my wicked ecstasy 
of that instant I have used †he same words †ha† I used, no† many pages before, †o describe †he fire 
†ha† burned †he mar†yred body of †he Fra†icello Michoel. Nor is i† an acciden† †ho† my hand, 
possive agen† of †he soul, has penned the same expression for two experiences so disparate, because 
probably I experienced them in the same way both at the time, when I lived through them, and now, 
as I have tried to bring them back to life on this parchment.

There is a mysterious wisdom by which phenomena among themselves disporate can be called by 
analogous names, just as divine things can be designated by terrestrial terms, and through 
equivocal symbols God can be called lion or leopard; ond death can be coiled sword: joy, flame: 
flame, death; death, abyss; abyss, perdition; perdition, rqving; qnd rqving, passion.

Why did 1, as a youth, depict the ecstasy of death that had impressed me in the martyr Michael in 
the words the saint had used for the ecstasy of (divine) life, and yet I could not refrain from 
depicting in the same words the ecstasy (culpable and fleeting) of earthly pleasure, which 
immediately afterward had spontaneously appeared to me as a sensation of death and annihilation* I 
shall try now to reflect both on the way I felt, a few months apart, two experiences at once 
uplifting and painful, and on the way in which that night in the abbey I consciously remembered the 
one and felt with my senses the other, a few hours apart, and, further, on the way I have relived 
them now, penning these lines, and on how in all three instances I recited them to myself with the 
words of the different experience of thot fainted soul annihilated in the divine vision. Have I 
perhaps blasphemed (then* now*)* What was similar in Michael‘s desire for death, in the transport I 
felt at the sight of the flame consuming him, in the desire for carnal union I felt with the girl, 
in the mystic shame with which I translated it allegorically, and in †he desire for joyous 
annihilation †ho† moved †he sain† †o die in his own love in order to live longer and eternally* Is 
i† possible †ha† things so equivocal can be said in such a univocal way* And this, it seems, is the 
teaching left us by Saint Thomas, the greatest of all doctors: the more openly it remains a figure 
of speech, the more it is a dissimilar similitude and not literal, the more a


metctphor reveals its truth. But if love of the flame and of the abyss are the metaphor for the 
love of God, can they be the metaphor for love of death and love of sin* Yes, as the lion and the 
serpent stand both for Christ and the Devil. The fact is that correct interpretation can be 
established only on the authority of the fathers, and in the case that torments me, I have no 
auctoritas to which my obedient mind can refer, and I burn in doubt (and again the imqge of fire 
qppeqrs to define the void of the truth and the fullness of the error that annihilate me!). What is 
happening, O Lord, in my spirit, now that I allow myself to be gripped by the vortex of memories 
and I conflagrate different times at once, as if I were to manipulate the order of the stars and 
the sequence of their celestial movements* Certainly I am overstepping the boundaries of my sinful 
and sick intelligence. Now, let us return to the task I had humbly set myself. I was telling about 
that day and the total bewilderment of the senses into which I sank. There, I hove told what I 
remembered on that occasion, and let my feeble pen, faithful and truthful chronicler, stop there.

I lay, how Ion9I do not know, the girl at my side. With a light motion her hand continued to touch 
my body, now damp with sweat. I felt an inner exultation, which was not peace, but like the last 
subdued flicker of a fire taking time to die beneath the embers, when the flame is already dead. I 
would not hesitate to call blessed ct man to whom it was grctnted to experience something similar 
in this life (I murmured as if in my sleep), even rarely (and, in fact, I experienced it only that 
time), and very rapidly, for the space of a single moment. As if one no longer existed, not feeling 
one's identity at all, or feeling lowered, almos† annihilated: if some mor†aI (I said †o myself) 
could for a single momen† and most rapidly enjoy what I have enjoyed, he would immediately look 
with a baleful eye at this perverse world, would be upse† by †he bone of daily life, would feel †he 
weigh† of †he body of dea†h.  Was †his
not what I had been taught* That invitation of my whole spirit to lose all memory in bliss was 
surely (now I understood it) the radiance of the eternal sun; and the joy that it produces opens, 
extends, enlarges mon, and the gaping chasm man bears within himself is no longer sealed so easily, 
for i† is the wound cut by the blow of love's sword, nor is there ctnything else here below more 
sweet and terrible. But such is the right of the sun: it riddles the wounded man with its rays and 
all the wounds widen, the man uncloses and extends, his very veins are laid open, his strength is 
now incapable of obeying the orders it receives and is moved solely by desire, the spirit burns, 
sunk into the abyss of what it is now touching, seeing its own desire and its own truth outstripped 
by the reality it hqs lived and is living.
And one witnesses, dumbfounded, one‘s own raving.

And in †he grip of †hese sensations of ineffable inner joy, I dozed off.

I reopened my eyes some time later, and the moonlight, perhaps because of q cloud, had grown much 
fainter. I stretched out my hand at my side and no longer felt the girl's body. I turned my head: 
she was gone.

The absence of the object thqt had unleashed my desire and slaked my thirst made me realize 
suddenly both the vanity of thot desire and the perversity of that thirst. Omne animal triste post 
coitum. I became aware that I had sinned. Now, after years and years, while I still bitterly bemoan 
my error, I cannot forget how that evening I had felt great pleasure, and I would be doing a wrong 
to the Almighty, who created all things in goodness and beauty, if I did not admit thot also 
between those two sinners something happened that in itself, naturaliter, was good and beautiful. 
But perhaps it is my present old age, which makes me feel, culpably, how beautiful and good all my 
youth was just when I


should turn my thoughts to death, which is approaching. Then, a young man, I did not think of 
death, but, hotly and sincerely, I wept for my sin.

I s†ood up, trembling, also because I had Iain a long †ime on †he cold s†ones of †he kitchen and my 
body was numb. I dressed, almost feverish. I glimpsed then in a corner the package that the girl 
hqd abandoned in her fligh†. I ben† †o examine †he objec†: i† was a kind of bundle, a rolled-up 
cIo†h †ha† seemed to come from the kitchen. I unwrapped it, and at first I did not understand what 
was inside, both because of the scant light and because of the shapeless shape of the contents. 
Then I understood. Among clots of blood and scraps of flabbier and whitish meat, before my eyes, 
dead but still throbbing with the gelatinous life of dead viscera, lined by livid nerves: a heart, 
of great size.

A dark veil descended over my eyes, an acid saliva rose in my mouth, I let out o cry and fell as a 
dead body falls.

NIGHT
In which Adso, dis†raugh†, confesses †o William and medi†o†es on †he function of woman in †he plan 
of creation, but then he discovers the corpse of a man.

I came around to find someone bathing my face. There, holding a lamp, was Brother William, who had 
put something under my heod.

“What's happened, Adso*” he asked me. “Have you been roaming about at night stealing offal from the 
kitchen*”

In short, William had awakened, sought me for I forget what reoson, and, not finding me, suspected 
me of going †o perform some bi† of bravado in †he library. Approaching †he Aedificium on †he 
kitchen side, he saw a shadow slip from the door toward the vegetable garden (it was the girl, 
leoving, perhaps because she had heard someone qpproqching). He tried to figure out who it wqs and 
follow her, but she (or, rather, the shadow, as she was for him) went toward the outside wall of 
the compound and disappeared. Then William—after an exploration of the environs—entered the kitchen 
and found me lying in a faint.

When, still terrified, I mentioned to him the package with the heart, blurting out somethin9 about 
another crime, he started laughing: “Adso, what man could have such a big heart* It‘s the heart of 
a cow, or an ox: they slaughtered an animal today, in fact. But tell me, how did it come into your 
hands*”

At that point, overwhelmed with remorse, and still stunned by my great feqr, I burst into a flood 
of teors and asked him to administer to me the sacrament of confession. Which he did, and I told 
him all, concealing nothing.

Brother William heard me out earnestly, but with o hint of indulgence. When I had finished his face 
turned grave and he soid: "Adso, you hove sinned, that is certain, against the commandment that 
bids you not to fornicate, and also against your duties as a novice. In your defense there is the 
fact that you found yourself in one of those situations in which even a father in the desert would 
have damned


himself. And of woman qs source of †emp†a†ion †he Scriptures have already said enough. Ecclesios†es 
says of woman †ha† her conversation is like burning fire, and the Proverbs say †ha† she takes 
possession of man's precious soul and the strongest men are ruined by her. And Ecclesiastes further 
says: ’And I find more bitter than death the woman, whose heart is snares and nets, and her hands 
as bands.’ And others have said she is the vessel of the Devil. Having affirmed this, dear Adso, I 
cannot convince myself †ha† God chose †o introduce such a foul being in†o creation wi†hou† also 
endowing i† with some virtues. And I cannot help reflecting that He granted her many privileges and 
motives of prestige, three of them very great indeed. In fact, He created man in this base world, 
and from mud; woman He created later, in paradise and of noble human matter. And he did not mold 
her from Adam's feet or his viscera, but from the rib. In the second place, the Lord, who is 
all-powerful, could have become incarnate as a man directly in some miraculous way, but he chose 
instead to dwell in the womb of a woman, a sign that it was not so foul after all. And when he 
appeared after the Resurrection, he appeared to a woman. And finally, in the celestial glory no man 
shall be king of thot realm, but the queen will be a woman who has never sinned. If, then, the Lord 
showed such favor to Eve herself and to her daughters, is it so abnormal thot we also should feel 
drawn by the graces and the nobility of
†ho† sex* Wha† I mean †o soy †o you, Adso, is †ho† you mus† no† do i† ogain, of course, bu† i† is 
no† so monstrous thctt you were tempted to do it. And qs far as that goes, for ct monk to hctve, 
ctt least once in his life, experience of carnal passion, so that he can one day be indulgent and 
understanding with the sinners he will counsel and console ... well, dear Adso, it is not a thing 
to be wished before it happens, but it is not something to vituperate too much once it has 
happened. So go with God and let us speak of it no more. Indeed, rather than reflect and dwell too 
much on something best forgotten, if possible“—and it seemed to me at this point that his voice 
faded as if at some private emotion—"let us ask ourselves the meaning of what happened this night. 
Who was this girl and whom was she meeting*”
“This I don‘t know, and I didn't see the man who was with her,“ I said.

"Very well, bu† we can deduce who i† wos from many and certain clues. Firs† of all, †he man was old 
ond ugly, one wi†h whom a girl does no† go willingly, especially if she is beautiful, as you say, 
†hough i† seems to me, my dear wolf cub, that you were prepared to find any food delicious.”
"Why old and ugly*“
"Because the girl didn't go with him for love, but for a pack of scraps. Certainly she is a girl 
from the village who, perhaps not for the first time, grants her fovors to some lustful monk out of 
hunger, ond receives qs recompense something for her and her family to eqt.”
"A harlot!” I said, horrified.
“A poor peasan† 9^I,Adso. Probably with smaller brothers to feed. Who, if she were able, would give 
herself for love and not for lucre. As she did last night. In fact, you tell me she found you young 
and handsome, and gave you gratis and out of love what to others she would have given for an ox 
heart and some bits of lung. And she felt so virtuous for the free gift she made of herself, and so 
uplifted, that she ran off without taking anything in exchange. This is why I think the other one, 
to whom she compared you, was neither young nor handsome.“


I confess that, profound as my repentance was, that explanation filled me with a sweet pride; but I 
kept silent and allowed my master to continue.

“This ugly old man must have the opportunity to go down to the village and deal with the peasants, 
for some purpose connected with his position. He must know how to get people into the abbey and out 
of i†, and know †here would be †ha† offal in †he kitchen (perhaps tomorrow i† would be soid †ha† 
†he door had been left open and a dog had come in and eaten the scraps). And, finally, he must have 
had a certain sense of economy, and a certain interest in seeing that the kitchen was not deprived 
of more precious victuals: otherwise he would have given her a steak or some choice cut. And so you 
see that the picture of our stranger is drawn very clearly and that all these properties, or 
accidents, are suited to a substance that I would have no fear in defining as our cellarer, Remigio 
of Voragine. Or, if I am mistaken, our mysterious Solvatore—who, for that matter, since he comes 
from these ports, can speak easily with the local people and would know how to persuade a girl to 
do what he would hove made her do, if you had not arrived.”

“That is certainly all correct,” I said, convinced, “but what is the good of knowing it now*”

“None. Or much,” Williom soid. “The s†ory may or may no† hove a connec†ion wi†h †he crimes †ha† 
concern us. On the other hand, if the cellarer was a Dolcinian, that would explain this, and vice 
versa. And we now know, finally, that this abbey is a place of many, bizarre events at night. And 
who can say that our cellarer, and Salvatore, who move through it in darkness with such ease, do 
not know, in any event, more things thon what they tell*”

“But will they tell them to us*”

“No, not if we behave in a compassionate manner, ignoring their sins. But if we were reqlly to know 
something, we would possess o way of persuading them to speok. In other words, if there is need, 
the cellarer and Salvatore are ours, and may God forgive us this deception, since He forgives so 
many other things,” he said, looking at me slyly; I did not hove the heart to moke any comment on 
the Iici†ness of †hese notions of his.

“And now we should go to bed, because in an hour it is matins. But I see you are still agitated, my 
poor Adso, s†iII fearful because of your sin.  There is nothing like a good spell in church †o calm 
†he spiri†.
I hove absolved you, but one never knows. Go and ask the Lord's confirmotion.” And he gove me a 
rather brisk slap on the heod, perhaps as a show of paternal and virile affection, perhaps as an 
indulgent penance. Or perhaps (as I culpably thought at that moment) in a sort of good-natured 
envy, since he was a man who so thirsted for new and vital experiences.
We headed for the church, takin9 our usual path, which I followed in haste, closing my eyes, 
because all †hose bones reminded me †oo obviously, †ho† nigh†, of how I was dus† and how foolish 
had been †he pride of my flesh.

When we reached the nave we saw a shadowy figure before the main altar. I thought it was again 
Ubertino, but it was Alinardo, who did not recognize us at first. He said he was unable to sleep 
and had decided to spend the night praying for that young monk who had disappeared (he could not 
even


remember the name): He prayed for his soul, if he were dead, and for his body, if he were lying ill 
and alone somewhere.

“Too many dead,” he said, “too many dead ... But it was written in the book of the apostle. With 
the first trumpet came the hqil, with the second a third part of the sea became blood: and you 
found one body in the hail, the other in blood.  The third trumpet warns that a burning star will 
fall in the third
part of rivers and fountains of waters. So I tell you, our third brother, has disappeared. And fear 
for the fourth, because the third part of the sun will be smitten, and of the moon and the stars, 
so there will be almost complete darkness  ”

As we came out of the transept, Williom asked himself whether there were not some element of truth 
in the old man's words.

“But,” I pointed out to him, “this would mean assuming that a single diabolical mind, using the 
Apocalypse as guide, hod arronged the three disappearances, also assuming that Berengar is dead. 
But, on the contrary, we know Adelmo died of his own volition. ”

“True,” William said, “but the same diabolical or sick mind could have been inspired by Adelmo's 
death to arrange the other two in a symbolic way. And if this were so, Berengar should be found in 
a river or a fountain. And †here are no rivers or fountains in †he abbey, a† leas† no† such as 
someone could drown or be drowned in.  ”

“There are only the baths,” I observed, almost by chance.

“Adso!” William soid. “You know, †ha† could be on idea* The balneory!”

“But they must have looked there. ”
“I sow the servants this morning when they were making the search; they opened the door of the 
balneary qnd took a glance inside, without investigating. They did not expect to find something 
carefully hidden: they were looking for a corpse lying somewhere theatrically, like Venantius's 
body in the jar.  Let's go and have a look. It is still dark anyway, and our lamp seems to go on 
burning
merrily.”
So we did, and without difficulty we opened the door of the balneqry, next to the infirmary.
Separated one from the other by thick curtains were some tubs, I don't recall how many. The monks 
used them for their ablutions, on the days the Rule established, and Severinus used them for 
therapeutic reasons, because nothing can restore body and mind better than q bath. A fireplace in 
one corner allowed †he wo†er †o be hea†ed easily. We found i† dir†y wi†h fresh ashes, and before i† 
a great cauldron lay, overturned. The water could be drawn from a font in another corner.

We looked in the firs† tubs, which were empty. Only the las†, concealed by a drawn curtain, was 
full, and next to it lay a garment, in a heap. At first sight, in the beam of our lamp, the surface 
of the liquid seemed smooth; but as the light struck it we glimpsed on the bottom, lifeless, a 
naked human body. We pulled it out slowly: Berengar. And this one, William said, truly had the face 
of a drowned


man. The fecttures were swollen. The body, white and flabby, without hair, seemed a womctn's except 
for the obscene spectacle of the flaccid pudenda. I blushed, then shuddered. I made the sign of the 
cross as William blessed the corpse.

FOURTH DAY

LAUDS

In which William and Severinus examine Berengar's corpse and discover that the tongue is black, 
unusual in a drowned man. Then they discuss most painful poisons and a past theft.

I will not go into how we informed the abbot, how the whole abbey woke before the canonical hour, 
the cries of horror, the fear and grief that could be seen on every face, and how the news spread 
to all the people of the compound, the servants blessing themselves and uttering formulas against 
the evil eye. I don't know whether the first office that morning proceeded ctccording to 
regulcttions, or who took part in it. I followed William and Severinus, who had Berengar's body 
wrapped up and ordered it laid ou† on a †abIe in †he infirmary.

When the qbbot and the other monks had left, the herbalist and my master studied the corpse at 
length, with the cold detachment of men of medicine.

“He died by drowning,” Severinus said, “there's no doubt. The face is swollen, the belly taut. ”

“But he was not drowned by another's hands,” William observed, “for in that cqse he would hqve 
reacted against the murderer's violence, whereos everything was neot and clean, as if Berengor had 
heated the water, filled the bath, and Iain in it of his own free will.”

“This doesn‘t surprise me,” Severinus said. "Berengar suffered from convulsions, qnd I myself hqd 
of†en †old him †ho† warm bo†hs serve †o calm agi†o†ion of †he body and †he spiri†. On several 
occasions he asked me leave to light the balneary fire. So he may have done last night. “

“Night before lost,” William said, "because this body—as you see—has remoined in the water at least 
one day.

William informed him of some of the events of that night. He did not tell him we had been in the 
scriptorium furtively, but, concealing various circumstances, he told him thot we had pursued a 
mysterious *'9ure who had taken a book from us. Severinus realized William was tellin9 him only a 
part of the truth, but he osked no further questions. He observed thot the agitation of Berengar, 
if he had been the mysterious thief, could have led him then to seek calm in a refreshing bath. 
Berengar, he said, was of a very sensitive na†ure, and sometimes a vexa†ion or an emotion brough† 
on his trembling and cold sweats and made his eyes bulge, and he would fall to the ground, spitting 
out a whitish slime.

“In any case,” William said, “before coming here he went somewhere else, because in the balneary I 
didn't see the book he stole. So he had been somewhere else, and afterward, we'll assume that, to 
calm


his emotion and perhaps to elude our search, he slipped into the balneary and immersed himself in 
the
water. Severinus, do you believe his illness could make him lose consciousness and drown*“

“Tha†’s possible,” Severinus said, dubiously. For some moments he had been examining †he hands of 
†he corpse. “Here's q curious thing ...” he sqid.

“What*”

“The other day I observed Venantius‘s hands, when the blood had been washed off, and I noticed a 
detail to which I attached little importance. The tips of two fingers of Venantius‘s right hand 
were dark, as if blackened by some dark substance.. Exactly—you see*—like two fingertips of 
Berengar now. In fact, here we have a trace also on the third finger. At the time I thought that 
Venontius had handled some inks in the scriptorium.  ”
“Interesting,” William said pensively, taking a closer look at Berengar's fingers. Dawn was 
breaking, the light indoors was still faint, and my master was obviously suffering the lack of his 
lenses. “Interesting,” he repeated. “But there are fainter traces also on the left hand, at least 
on the thumb and index.”

“If it were only the right hand, they would be the fingers of someone who grasps something small, 
or long and thin. ”

“Like a stylus. Or some food. Or an insect. Or a serpent. Or a monstrance. Or a stick. Too many 
things. But if there are signs also on the other hand, it could also be a goblet; the right hand 
holds it firmly and the left helps, exerting less strength. ”

Severinus was now gently rubbing the dead man's fingers, but the dark color did not disappear. I 
noticed he had put on a pair of gloves, which he probably used when he handled poisonous 
substances. He sniffed, but without receiving any sensation. “I could cite for you mony vegetable 
(and also mineral) substances †hq† leave †races of †his sor†. Some Ie†hal, o†hers no†. The 
iIIumina†ors sometimes have gold dust on their fingers.  ”

“Adelmo was an illuminator,” William said. “I imagine that, shattered as his body was, you didn't 
think of examining the fingers. But these others may have touched something thot hod belonged to 
Adelmo.”

“I really don‘t know,” Severinus said. “Two dead men, both with blackened fingers. What do you 
deduce from that*”

“I deduce nothing. nihil sequitur geminis ex particularibus unquam. Both cases would hctve to 
conform to a rule. For example: a substance exists †ha† blackens the fingers of those who touch i†. 
”

Triumphantly, I completed the syllogism: “... Venantius and Berengar have blackened fingers, ergo 
they touched this substance!”

“Good, Adso,” William said, “a pity that your syllogism is not valid, because aut semel aut iterum 
medium generaliter esto, and in this syllogism the middle term never appears as general. A sign 
that


we haven‘t chosen the major premise well. I shouldn't hctve said that all those who touch a certain 
substance have black fingers, because there could also be people with black fingers who have not 
touched the substance. I should have said that all those and only all those who have black fingers 
have certainly touched a given substance. Venantius and Berengar, etc. With which we would have a 
Darii, an excellent third mode of the first syllogistic figure.” “Then we have the ctnswer,” I 
said, delighted.

“Alas, Adso, you have too much faith in syllogisms! What we have, once again, is simply the 
question. That is: we have ventured the hypothesis that Venantius and Berengar touched the same 
thing, an unquestionably reasonable hypothesis. But when we have imagined a substance thot, alone 
among all substances, causes this result (which is still to be established), we still don‘t know 
what it is or where they found it, or why they touched it. And, mind you, we don't even know if 
it's the substance they touched that brought them to their death. Imagine a madman who wants to 
kill all those who touch gold dust. Would we soy it‘s gold dust thot kills*”

I was upset. I had always believed logic was a universal weapon, and now I realized how its 
validity depended on the way it was employed. Further, since I had been with my master I had become 
aware, and wqs to become even more aware in the dqys thqt followed, that logic could be especially 
useful when you entered i† bu† †hen lef† i†.

Severinus, who was surely not a logician, was meanwhile reflecting on the basis of his own 
experience. “The universe of poisons is various as the mysteries of nature are various,” he said. 
He pointed to a series of pots and ampoules, which we had already admired, neatly arranged on 
shelves along the walls, together with many volumes. “As I told you before, many of these herbs, 
duly compounded and administered in the proper dosage, could be used for lethal beverages and 
ointments. Over there, datura stramonium, belladonna, hemlock: they con bring on drowsiness, 
stimulation, or both; taken with due cqre they are excellent medicines, but in excess doses they 
bring on death.”
“But none of these substances would leave marks on the fingers*”
“None, I believe. Then there are substances thqt become dangerous only if ingested, whereas others 
ac† instead on †he skin. And hellebore can cause vomiting in a person who grasps i† †o uproo† i†.
Dittany and fraxinella, when in flower, bring on intoxication in gardeners who touch them, as if 
the gardeners had drunk wine. Black hellebore, merely at the touch, provokes diarrhea. Other plants 
cause polpitotions of the heart, others of the heod, still others silence the voice. gut viper's 
venom, applied to the skin and not allowed to enter the blood, produces only a sI‹9ht irritcttion.  
And once I wets
shown a compound that, when applied to the inside of a dog‘s thighs, near the genitalia, causes the
animal †o die in a shor† †ime in horrible convulsions, as †he limbs gradually grow rigid. ”

“You know many †hings abou† poisons,” William said wi†h who† sounded like admiration in his voice.

Severinus looked hard into his eyes for a few moments. “I know what a physician, an herbalist, a 
student of the sciences of human health must know.”

William remained thoughtful for some time. Then he asked Severinus to open the corpse‘s mouth and 
observe the tongue. Severinus, his curiosity aroused, took a thin spatula, one of the instruments 
of his medical art, and obeyed. He uttered a cry of amazement: “The tongue is black!”



"So, then,” William murmured, “he grasped something with his fingers and ingested it.  This
eliminates the poisons you mentioned before, which kill by penetrating the skin. But it doesn‘t 
make our deductions any easier. Because now, for him and for Venantius, we must presume a voluntary 
act. They rasped something and put it in their mouths, knowing what they were doing. ”

“Something to eat* To drink*“
“Perhaps. Or perhaps—why not*—a musical instrument, like a flute ”
"Absurd," Severinus said.
“Of course it's absurd. But we mustn't dismiss any hypothesis, no matter how farfetched. Now let‘s 
return to the poisonous substance. If someone who knows poisons as you do had broken in here and 
hod used some of †hese herbs of yours, could he have produced a Ie†hal oin†men† capable of cousing 
those marks on the fingers and the tongue* Capable of being mixed with food or drink, smeared on a 
spoon, on something that is put in the mouth*"

"Yes,” Severinus admitted, “but who* And besides, even if we accept this hypothesis, how would he 
have administered †he poison †o our †wo poor brothers*”

Frankly, I myself couldn’† imagine Venan†ius or Berengar letting himself be approached by someone 
who handed him a mysterious substance and being persuaded to eat it or drink it. But William did 
not seem upset by this unlikelihood. “We will think about that later,” he said, "because now I 
would like you to try to remember some event that perhaps you haven't recalled before. Someone who 
asked you questions ctbout your herbs, for instance; someone who has easy access to the infirmary  
“

"Just a moment," Severinus said. “A long time ago, years it was, on one of those shelves I kept a 
highly powerful substance, given to me by a brother who had traveled in distant lands. He couldn't 
tell me what it was made of, herbs for sure, but not all of them fctmilior. To look ctt, it wets 
slimy and yellowish; bu† I was advised no† †o †ouch i†, because if i† only came in†o con†ac† wi†h 
my lips i† would kill me in a short time. The brother told me that, when ingested even in minimal 
doses, in the space of a half hour it caused a feeling of great weariness, then a slow paralysis of 
all the limbs, and finally death. He didn‘t want to carry it with him, and so he presented it to 
me. I kept it for a long time, because I mectnt to examine it somehow. Then one day there was a 
great storm up here. One of my assistants, a novice, had left the infirmary door open, and the 
hurricane, wrought havoc in this room where we are now. Bottles broken, liquids spilled on the 
floor, herbs and powders scattered. I worked a whole day putting my things back in order, and I 
accepted help only in sweeping away the broken vessels and the herbs that could not be recovered. 
At the end I realized thot the very ampoule I mentioned to you was missing. At first I was worried, 
then I decided it had been broken and become confused with the other rubbish. I had the infirmary 
floor washed carefully, and the shelves.  “
“And you had seen the ampoule a few hours before the storm*“
“Yes  or, rather, no, now that I think about it. It was behind a row of pots, carefully hidden, and 
I
didn't check it every day. ”




"Therefore, as far as you know, it could have been stolen quite a while before the storm, without 
your finding out*”

“Now †hq† I †hink abou† i†, yes, unquestionably.“

“And that novice of yours could have stolen it and, then could have seized the occasion of the 
storm deliberately †o leave †he door open and crea†e confusion among your †hings*”

Severinus seemed very excited. “Yes, of course. Not only that, but as I recall what happened, I was 
quite surprised that the hurricane, violent though it was, had upset so many things. It could quite 
well be that someone took advantage of the storm to devastate the room and produce more damage than 
the wind could have done!”
"Who was the novice*“

“His name was Augustine. But he died last yeqr, a fqll from scaffolding as he qnd other monks and 
servants were cleaning the sculptures of the fasade of the church. Actually, now that I think about 
it, hesworeupond down†ho†he hod no†lef††hedooropenbefore†hes†orm.Iwos†heone,inmy fury, who held him 
responsible for the accident. Perhaps he really was not guilty.”

"And so we have a †hird person, perhaps for more exper† †han a novice, who knew abou† your rare
poison. Whom had you †oId abou† i†*"

“That I really don't remember. The abbot, of course, to ask his permission to keep such a dangerous 
substance. And a few others, perhaps in the library, because I was looking for some herbaria thctt 
might give me information.”

“But didn't you tell me you keep here the books that are most useful to your art*“

"Yes, and many of †hem,” he said, pointing †o a corner of †he room where some shelves held dozens 
of volumes. “But then I was looking for certain books I couldn't keep here, which Malachi actually 
was very reluctant to let me see. In fact, I had to ask the abbot's authorization.” His voice sank, 
and he was almost shy about letting me hear his words. “You know, in a secret part of the library, 
they keep books on necromancy, black magic, and recipes for diabolical philters. I was allowed to 
consult some of these works, of necessity, and I was hoping to find a description of that poison 
and its functions. In vain.“

“So you spoke qbout it with Molochi."

“Of course, with him definitely, and perhaps also with Berengar, who was his assistant. But you 
mustn't jump to conclusions: I don't remember clearly, perhaps other monks were present as I was 
talking, the scriptorium at times is fairly crowded, you know.  “

“I'm not suspecting anyone. I'm only trying to understand what can have happened. In any event, you 
tell me this took place some years ago, and it's odd that anyone would steal a poison and then not 
use it


until so much lqter. It would suggest a malignant mind brooding for a long time in darkness over a 
murderous plan.“
Severinus blessed himself, an expression of horror on his face. “God forgive us all!” he said.

There was no further commen† †o be mode. We ogain covered Berengar's body, which had †o be prepared 
for the funeral.


PRIME

In which William induces firs† Solva†ore and then the cellarer to confess their pos†, Severinus 
finds the stolen lenses, Nicholas brings the new ones, and William, now with six eyes, goes Io 
decipher the manuscript of Venantius.

We were coming out as Malachi entered. He seemed very annoyed to find us there and started to leave 
again. From inside, Severinus sqw him and sqid, “Were you looking for me* Is it for—” He broke off, 
glancing at us. Malachi signaled to him, imperceptibly, as if to say, “We’ll talk about it later. 
..” We were going out as he was entering, and so all three of us were to the doorway.

Malachi said, somewhat redundantly, “I was looking for the brother herbalist. ... I ... I have a 
headache.” “It must be the enclosed air of the library,” William said to him, in a tone of 
considerate sympathy. “You should inhale something.”

Molachi's lips twitched as if he wanted to speok again, but then he gave up the idea, bowed his 
head, and wen† on inside, as we moved off.
“What is he seeing Severinus for*” I asked.
“Adso,” my master sqid to me impcttiently, “lectrn to use your hectd and think.” Then he chctnged 
the subject: “We must question some people now. At least,” he added, as his eyes explored the 
grounds, “while they're still alive. By the way: from now on we must be careful about what we eat 
and drink. Always take your food from the common plate, and your beverage from the pitcher the 
others have filled their cups from. After Berengar we are the ones who know most. Except, 
naturally, the murderer.”
“But whom do you want to question now*”
“Adso,” William said, “you will hqve observed thqt here the most interesting things happen at 
ni9ht. They die at night, they wonder about the scriptorium at night, women are brought at night 
into the abbey. ... We have a daytime abbey and a nigh††ime abbey, and †he nigh††ime one seems, 
unhappily, †he more interesting. So, every person who roams about at night interests us, including, 
for example, the man you saw last night with the girl. Perhaps the business of the girl does not 
have anything to do with
the poisonings, and perhaps it has. In any case, I hove my ideas about last night‘s man, and he 
must be one who knows other things about the nocturnal life of this holy place. And, speak of the 
Devil, here he is, coming this way.”



He pointed to Salvatore, who had also seen us. I notice a slight hesitation in his step, as if, 
wishing to avoid us, he was about to turn around. But it was only for a moment. Obviously, he 
realized he couldn‘t escape the meeting, and he continued toward us. He greeted us with a broad 
smile and a fairly unctuous “Benedicite.” My master hardly allowed him to finish and spoke to him 
sharply.
“You know the Inquisition arrives here tomorrow*” he asked him.
Salvatore didn't seem pleased with this news. In a faint voice, he asked, “And me*”

“And you would be wise to tell the truth to me, your friend and a Friar Minor os you once were, 
rather than hove to tell it tomorrow to those whom you know quite well.”

Attacked so brusquely, Salvatore seemed to abandon all resistance. With a meek air he looked qt 
William, as if to indicate he was ready to tell whatever he was asked.

“Last night there was q womqn in the kitchen. Who was with her*”
“Oh, a female who sells herself like mercandia cannot be bona or have cortesia,” Salvatore recited. 
“I don't want to know whether the girl is pure. I want to know who was with her!”
“Deu, these evil females are all clever! They think di e noche about how to trap a man. ”
William seized him roughly by the chest.“ Who was with her, you or the cellarer*“

Salvatore realized he couldn't go on lying. He began to tell a strange story, from which, with 
great effort, we learned that, to please the cellarer, he procured girls for him in the village, 
introducing them within the wolls at night by paths he would not reveal to us. But he swore he 
acted out of the sheer goodness of his heqr†, betraying a comic regre† †ho† he could no† find q wqy 
†o enjoy his own pleasure and see that the girl, having satisfied the cellarer, would give 
something also to him. He said all this with slimy, lubricious smiles and, winks, as if to suggest 
he was speaking to men made of flesh, accustomed to such practices. He stole glances at me, nor 
could I check him as I would have liked, because I fel† myself bound †o him by a common secre†, his 
occomplice ond companion in sin.

At this point William decided to stake everything. He asked Salvatore abruptly, “Did you know 
Remigio before or af†er you were wi†h Dolcino*”

Salva†ore knel† ct† his fee†, begging him, be†ween sobs, not to destroy him, †o save him from †he 
Inquisition. William solemnly swore not to tell anyone what he would learn, and Salvatore did not 
hesitate to deliver the cellarer into our hands. The two men had met on Bald Mountain, both in 
Dolcino's band: Salvatore and the cellarer had fled together and had entered the convent of Casale, 
and, still together, they had joined the Cluniacs. As he stammered out pleas for forgiveness, it 
was clear there was nothing further to be learned from him. William decided it was worth taking 
Remigio by surprise, and he left Salvatore, who ran to seek refuge in the church.


The cellarer was on the opposite side of the abbey, in front of the granaries, bargaining with some 
peasants from the valley. He looked at us apprehensively and tried to act very busy, but William 
insisted on speaking with him.

“For reasons connec†ed wi†h your position you are obviously forced †o move abou† †he abbey even 
when the others are asleep, I imagine,” William said.

“That depends,” Remigio answered. “Sometimes there are little matters to deal with, and I have to 
socrifice a few hours' sleep.”

“Has nothing happened to you, in these cases, that might indicate there is someone else roaming 
about, without your justification, between the kitchen and the library*”
“If I had seen anything, I would have told the abbot.”
“Of course,” William agreed, and abruptly changed the subject: “The village down below is not very 
rich, is it*”
“Yes and no,” Remigio answered. “Some prebenders live there, abbey dependents, and they share our 
wealth in the good years. For example, on Saint John‘s Day they received twelve bushels of malt, a 
horse, seven oxen, a bull, four heifers, five calves, twenty sheep, fifteen pigs, fifty chickens, 
and seventeen hives. Also twenty smoked pigs, twenty-seven tubs of lard, half o measure of honey, 
three measures of soap, a fishnet ...”

“I understand, I understand,” William interrupted him. “But you must admit that this still tells me 
nothing of †he si†ua†ion of †he village, how many ctmong i†s inhctbi†an†s have prebends, and how 
much land those who are not prebendaries possess to cultivate on their own. ”

“Oh, as far as that goes,” Remigio said, “a normal family down there has as much as fifty tablets 
of land.”

“How much is a †abIe†*”

“Four square trabucchi, of course.” “Square trabucchi* How much are they*”
“Thir†y-six square fee† is a square †robucco. Or, if you prefer, eigh† hundred linear †rabucchi 
make a Piedmont mile. And calculate that a family—in the lands to the north—can cultivate olives 
for at least half a sack of oil.”
“Half a sack*”
“Yes, one sack makes five emine, and one emina makes eight cups.”


“I see,” my master said, disheartened. “Every locality has its own measures. Do you measure wine, 
for example, by the tankard*”

“Or by †he rubbio. Six rubbie make one bren†a, and eigh† bren†e, a keg. If you like, one rubbio is 
six pints from two tankards.”

“I believe my ideas are clear now,” William said, resigned.
“Do you wish to know anything else*” Remigio asked, with a tone thot to me seemed defiant.

“Yes, I was asking you about how they live in the volley, because today in the library I was 
meditating on the sermons to women by Humbert of Romans, and in particular on thot chapter 'Ad 
mulieres pouperes in villulis,’ in which he says that they, more than others, are tempted to sins 
of the flesh because of their poverty, and wisely he says that they commit mortal sin when they sin 
with a layman, bu† †he mor†oIi†y of †he sin becomes greater when i† is commi††ed wi†h a pries†, and 
grea†es† of all when the sin is with a monk, who is dead to the world. You know better than I that 
even in holy places such qs ctbbeys the temptations of the noontime Devil are never wanting. I was 
wondering whether in our contacts with the people of the village you had heard that some monks, God 
forbid, had induced maidens into fornication.”

Although my master said these things in an almost absent tone, my reqder can imagine how the words 
upset the poor cellorer. I cannot say he blanched, but I will say that I was so expecting him to 
turn pale that I saw him look whiter.

“You ask me about things that I would already have told the abbot if I knew them,” he answered 
humbly. “In any case, if, as I imagine, this informcttion serves for your investigation, I will not 
keep silent about anything I may learn. Indeed, now that you remind me, with regard to your first 
question
The night poor Adelmo died, I was stirring about the yard ... a question of the hens, you know ... 
I had heard rumors thot one of the blacksmiths was stealing from the chicken coops at night.  Yes,
that night I did happen to see—from the distance, I couldn‘t swear to it—Berengar going bqck into 
the dormitory, moving along the choir, as if he had come from the Aedificium. I wasn‘t surprised; 
there
had been whispering about Berengar among the monks for some time. Perhaps you‘ve heard ”
“No. Tell me.”
“Well ... how can I say it* Berengar was suspected of harboring passions that  that are not proper
for a monk. ”
“Are you perhaps trying to tell me he hctd relations with Village 9'•!*, nSI was asking you*”
The cellarer coughed, embarrassed, and flashed a somewhat obscene smile. “Oh, no  even less proper
passions ”

“Then a monk who enjoys carnal satisfaction with a village maid is indulging in passions, on the 
other hand, that are somehow proper*”


“I didn't sqy that, but you'll agree thqt there is a hierarchy of depravity as there is of virtue.  
The
flesh can be tempted according to nature and  against nature.”
“You're telling me that Berengar was impelled by carnal desires for those of his own sex*”
“I'm saying that such were the whisperings.  I'm informing you of these things os proof of my
sincerity and my good will. ”

“And I thank you. And I ogree with you that the sin of sodomy is far worse than other forms of 
lust, which, frankly, I am not inclined to investigate. ”
“Sad, wretched things, even if they prove to hove taken place,” the cellarer said philosophically:
“Yes, Remigio. We are all wretched sinners. I would never seek the mote in a brother‘s eye, since I 
am so afraid of having a great beam in my own. But I will be grateful to you for any beams you may 
mention to me in the future. So we will talk great, sturdy trunks of wood and we will allow the 
motes to swirl in the ctir. How much did you say a squctre trctbucco wets*”
“Thirty-six square feet. But you mustn't waste your time. When you wish to know something specific, 
come to me. Consider me a faithful friend.”

“I do consider you as such,” William soid warmly. “Ubertino †old me †ha† you once belonged †o my 
own order. I would never betray a former brother, especially in these days when we are awaiting the 
arrival of a papal legation led by a grand inquisitor, famous for having burned many Dolcinians. 
You said a square †robucco equals †hir†y-six square fee†*”

The cellarer wos no fool. He decided it wos no longer worthwhile playing at cat and mouse, 
particulorly since he realized he was the mouse.

“Brother William,” he sctid, “I see you know many more things than I imagined. Help me, and I'll 
help you. I†’s †rue, I am a poor man of flesh, and I succumb †o †he lures of †he flesh. Salvo†ore 
†old me that you or your novice caught them last night in the kitchen. You have traveled widely, 
William; you know that not even the cardinals in Avignon are models of virtue. I know you are not 
questioning me because of these wretched little sins. But I also realize you have learned something 
of my past. I have had a strange life, like mctny of us Minorites. Years ago I believed in the 
ideal of poverty, and I abandoned the community to live as a vagabond. I believed in Dolcino's 
preaching, as many others like me did. I'm not an educated man; I've been ordained, but I can 
barely say Mass. I know little of theology. And perhaps I'm not really moved by ideas. You see, I 
once tried to rebel against the overlords; now I serve them, and for the sake of the lord of these 
lands I give orders to men like myself. Betray or rebel: we simple folk have little choice.”
“Sometimes the simple understand things better than the learned,” William said.
“Perhaps,” the cellarer said with a shrug. “But I don't even know why I did what I did, then. You 
see, for Salvatore it was comprehensible: his parents were serfs, he came from a childhood of 
hardship and illness. ... Dolcino represented rebellion, the destruction of the lords. For me it 
was different: I


came from a city family, I wasn‘t running away from hunger. It was—I don't know how to say it—a 
feast of fools, a magnificent carnival. ... On the mountains with Dolcino, before we were reduced 
to eating the flesh of our companions killed in battle, before so many died of hardship that we 
couldn‘t eat them all, and they were thrown to the birds and the wild animals on the slopes of 
Rebello ... or maybe in those moments, too ... there was an atmosphere ... can I scty of freedom* I 
didn't know, before, what freedom was; the preachers said to us, ‘The truth will make you free.‘ We 
felt free, we thought that was the truth. We thought everything we were doing was right.  ”
And there you took  to uniting yourself freely with women*” I asked, and I don‘t even know why, but
since the ni9ht before, Ubertino's words had been haunting me, along with what I had read in the 
scriptorium and the events that had befallen me. William looked at me, curious; he had probably not 
expected me to be so bold and outspoken. The cellarer stared at me as if I were a strange animal.

“On Rebello,” he said, “there were people who throughout their childhood had slept, ten or more of 
them, in a room of a few cubits—brothers and sisters, fathers and daughters. What do you think this 
new situation meant to them* They did from choice what they had formerly done from necessity. And
†hen, a† nigh†, when you fear †he arrival of †he enemy †roops and you cling †igh† †o your neighbor, 
on the ground, so as not to feel cold ... The heretics: you pitiful monks who come from a castle 
and end up in an abbey †hink †ha† i†'s a form of belief, inspired by †he Devil. Bu† i†‘s a way of 
living, and i† is  i†
was ... a new experience. ... There were no more masters; and God, we were told, was with us. I'm 
not saying we were right, William, and, in fact, you find me here because I abandoned them before 
long. But I never really understood our learned disputes about the poverty of Christ and ownership 
and rights. ... I told you, it was a great carnival, and in carnival time everything is done 
backward. As you grow old, you grow not wise but greedy. And here I am, a glutton.  You can condemn 
a heretic to
death, but would you condemn a glutton*”
“That's enough, Remigio,” William said. “I'm not questioning you about what happened then, but 
about what happened recently. Be frank with me, and I will surely not seek your downfall. I cannot 
and would not judge you. But you must tell me what you know about events in the abbey. You move 
about too much, night and day, not to know something. Who killed Venantius*”
“I do not know, I give you my solemn oath. I know when he died, and where.”

“When* Where*”

“I'll tell you. That night, an hour after compline, I went into the kitchen. ”
“How did you enter, and for what reasons*”
“By the door from the vegetable garden. I have a key I had the smiths make for me long ago. The 
kitchen door is the only one not barred on the inside. And my reasons ... are not important; you 
said yourself you don't want to condemn me for my weaknesses of the flesh. ” He smiled, 
embarrassed.
“But I wouldn‘t want you to believe I spend my days in fornication, either.  That night I was 
looking
for food †o give †o †he girl Salva†ore was †o bring in†o †he kitchen. ”

“Where from*”




“Oh, the outside walls have other entrances besides the gate. The abbot knows them: I know them. 
But that evening the girl didn't come in: I sent her back precisely because of what I discovered, 
what I'm about to tell you. This is why I tried to have her return last night. If you'd arrived a 
bit later you would hctve found me instead of Salvatore: it was he who warned me there were people 
in the Aedificium. So I went back to my cell.  ”
“Let's return to the night between Sunday and Monday.”
“Yes, then. I entered the kitchen, and on the floor I saw Venantius, dead.”
“In the kitchen*”
“Yes, near the sink. Perhaps he had just come down from the scriptorium.” “No sign of a struggle*”
“None. Though †here was a broken cup beside †he body, and †races of wo†er on †he ground.”

“How do you know it was water*”
“I don't know. I thought it was water. What else might it have been*”
As William pointed out to me later, that cup could mean two different things. Either someone had 
given Venantius o poisoned potion to drink right there in the kitchen, or else the poor youth had 
already taken the poison (but where* qnd when*) and had come down to drink, to soothe a sudden 
burning, a spasm, a poin that seared his viscera or his tongue (for certainly his must have been 
black like Berengar‘s).

In any case, we could leqrn no more for the moment. Having glctnced at the corpse, terrified, 
Remigio asked himself what he should do and decided he would do nothing. If he sought help, he 
would have to admit he had been wandering around the Aedificium at night, nor would it do his now 
lost brother any good. Therefore, he resolved to leave things as they were, waiting for someone 
else to discover the body in the morning, when the doors were opened. He rushed to heod off 
Salvatore, who was already bringing †he girl in†o †he abbey, †hen he ctnd his accomplice wen† off 
†o sleep, if †heir a9'†a†ed vigil †iII matins could be called that. And at matins, when the 
swineherds brought the news to the abbot, Remigio believed †he body had been discovered where he 
had lef† i†, and was aghas† †o find i† in †he jar. Who had spirited the corpse ou† of the kitchen* 
For this Remigio had no explanation.

“The only one who con move freely about the Aedificium is Malachi,” William said.

The cellarer reacted violently: “No, not Malachi. That is, I don't believe  In any case, I didn't 
say
anything †o you agoins† Malachi. ”

“Rest assured, whatever your debt to Malachi may be. Does he know something about you*”


"Yes." The cellarer blushed. “And he has behaved like a man of discretion. If I were you, I would 
keep an eye on Benno. He had stronge connections with Berengar and Venontius.  But I swear to you, 
I've
seen nothing else. If I learn something, I'll tell you.”

“For the present this will do. I‘ll seek you out again if I need you.” The cellarer, obviously 
relieved, returned to his dealings, sharply reproaching the peasants, who in the meantime had 
apparently shifted some sacks of seeds.

At that point Severinus joined us. In his hand he was carrying William‘s lenses—the ones stolen two 
ni9hts before. “I found them inside Berengar‘s habit," he said. “I saw them on your nose the other 
day in the scriptorium. They are yours, aren‘t they*“

"God be praised,” William cried joyously. “We've solved two problems! I have my lenses and I 
finally know for sure that it was Berengar who robbed us the other night in the scriptorium!“

We had barely finished speaking when Nicholas of Morimondo came running up, even more triumphant 
than William. In his hands he held ct finished pctir of lenses, mounted on their fork. "William," 
he cried, "I did it all by myself. I've finished them! I believe they'll work!“ Then he saw that 
William had other lenses on his nose, and he was stunned. William didn't want to humiliate him: he 
took off his old lenses and tried on the new ones. "These are better than the others,” he said. 
“So. I‘ll keep the old ones as a spare pair, and will always use yours.” Then he turned to me. 
"Adso, now I shall withdraw to my cell to read †hose papers you know abou†. A† las†! Wai† for me 
somewhere. And †hank you, †hank all of you, dearest brothers.“

Terce was ringing and I went to the choir, to recite with the others the hymn, the psalms, the 
verses, and †he "Kyrie.” The o†hers were praying for †he soul of †he deqd Berengar. I wqs thanking 
God for hoving allowed us †o find no† one bu† †wo pairs of lenses.

In that great peace, forgetting. all the ugly things I hod seen and heard, I dozed off, waking only 
os the office ended. I realized I hadn't slept that night and I was distressed to think qlso how I 
had expended much of my s†reng†h. And o† †his poin†, coming ou† in†o †he fresh oir, I began †o find 
my thoughts obsessed by the memory of the girl.

Trying to distract myself, I begon to stride rapidly over the grounds. I felt a slight dizziness. I 
clapped my numbed hands * 9ether. I stamped my feet on the earth. I was still sleepy, and yet I 
felt awake and full of life. I could not understand what was happening to me.

TERCE

In which Adso writhes in the torments of love, then William arrives with Venantius‘s text, which 
remains undecipherable even after it has been deciphered.

To tell the truth, the other terrible events following my sinful encounter with the girl had caused 
me almost to forget that occurrence, and once I had confessed to Brother William, my spirit was 
relieved of the remorse I had felt on waking after my guilty lapse, so it was as if I had handed 
over to the


monk, with my words, the burden itself of which they were the signifying voice. Whqt is the purpose 
of the holy cleansing of confession-, if not to unload the weight of sin, and the remorse it 
involves, into the very bosom of our Lord, obtaining with absolution a new and airy lightness of 
soul, such as to make us forget the body tormented by wickedness* But I was not freed of 
everything. Now, as I walked in the cold, pale sun of that winter morning, surrounded by the fervor 
of men and animals, I began to remember my experiences in a different way. As if, from everything 
that had happened, my repentance and the consoling words of the penitential cleansing no longer 
remained, but only visions of bodies and human limbs. Into my feverish mind came abruptly the ghost 
of Berengar, swollen with water, ond I shuddered with revulsion ond pity. Then, as if to dispel 
that lemur, my mind turned to other images of which the memory was a fresh receptacle, and I could 
not avoid seeing, clear before my eyes (the eyes of the soul, but olmost as if it appeared before 
my fleshly eyes), the image of the girl, beautiful ond terrible as an army orrayed for bo††Ie.

I have vowed (aged amanuensis of a text till now unwritten, though for long decades it has spoken 
in my mind) †o be a faithful chronicler, no† only ou† of love for †he †ru†h, or †he desire (wor†hy 
†hough i† be) to instruct my future readers, but also out of a need to free my memory, dried up and 
weary of visions †ha† have troubled i† for q whole lifetime. Therefore, I mus† †eII everything, 
decently bu† without shame. And I must say. now, and cleorly, what I thought then and olmost tried 
to conceal from myself, walking over the grounds, sometimes breaking into a run so that I might 
attribute to the motion of my body the sudden pounding of my heart, or stopping to admire the work 
of the villeins, deluding myself that I was being distracted by such contemplation, breathing the 
cold air deeply into my lungs, as o man drinks wine to forget fear or sorrow.

In vain. I thought of the girl. My flesh had forgotten the intense pleasure, sinful and fleeting (a 
base thing), that union with her had given me: but my soul had not forgotten her face, and could 
not manage to feel thqt this memory was perverse: rqther, it throbbed as if in that face shone all 
the bliss of creation.

I sensed, in a confused way, and almost denying to myself the truth of what I felt, that the poor, 
fiI†hy, impuden† creature who sold herself (who knows wi†h wha† stubborn constancy) †o o†her 
sinners, that daughter of Eve, weak like all her sisters, who had so often bartered her own flesh, 
was yet something splendid and wondrous. My intellect knew her as an occasion of sin, my sensitive 
appetite perceived her as the vessel of every grace. It is difficult to say what I felt. I could 
try to write that, still caught in the snores of sin, I desired culpably, for her to appear at 
every moment, and I spied on the labor of the workers to see whether, around the corner of a but or 
from the darkness of a barn, that form that had seduced me might emerge. But I would not be writing 
the truth, or, rather, I would be attempting to draw a veil over the truth to attenuate its force 
and clarity. Because the truth is that I “saw“ the girl, I sow her in the branches of the bore tree 
that stirred lightly when a benumbed sparrow flew to seek refuge there: I saw her in the eyes of 
the heifers that came out of the barn, and I heard her in the bleating of the sheep that crossed my 
erratic path. It was as if all creation spoke to me of her, and I desired to see her again, true, 
but I was also prepared to accept the idea of never seeing her again, and of never lying again with 
her, provided that I could savor the joy that filled me that morning, and have her always near even 
if she were to be, and for eternity, distant. It was, now I am trying to understand, as if—just as 
the whole universe is surely like a book
written by the finger of God, in which everything speaks to us of the immense goodness of its 
Creator,
in which every creature is description and mirror of life and death, in which the humblest rose


becomes a gloss of our terrestrial progress—everything, in other words, spoke to me only of the 
face I hod hardly glimpsed in the aromatic shadows of the kitchen. I dwelled on these fantasies 
because I said to myself (or, rather, did not say: at that moment I did not formulate thoughts 
translatable into words) that if the whole world is destined to speak to me of the power, goodness, 
and wisdom of the Creator, and if that morning the whole world spoke to me of the girl, who (sinner 
though she mqy have been) was nevertheless a chapter in the great book of creation, a verse of the 
greot psalm chanted by the cosmos—I said to myself (I say now) that if this occurred, it could only 
be a part of the great theophanic design that sustains the universe, arranged like a lyre, miracle 
of consonance and harmony. As if intoxicated, I then enjoyed her presence in the things I saw, ond, 
desiring her in them, with the sight of them I was sated.

And yet I felt a kind of sorrow, because at the same time I suffered from an absence, though I was 
happy with the many ghosts of a presence. It is difficult for me to explain this mystery of 
contradiction, sign that the human spirit is fragile and never proceeds directly along the paths of 
divine reason, which has built the world as a perfect syllogism, but instead grasps only isolated 
and often disjointed propositions of this syllogism, whence derives the ease with which we fall 
victims to the deceptions of the Evil One. Was it ct deception of the Evil One, thctt morning, 
thctt so moved me* I think today that it was, because I was a novice, but I think that the human 
feeling that stirred me was not bad in itself, but only with regard to my state. Because in itself 
it was the feeling that moves man toward woman so that the one couples with the other, as the 
apostle of the Gentiles wants, and that both be flesh of one flesh, and that together they 
procreqte new human beings and succor each other from you†h †o old age. Only †he apostle spoke †hus 
for †hose who seek a remedy for lus† and who do not wish to burn, recalling, however, that the 
condition of chastity is far preferable, the condition to which as a monk I had consecrated myself. 
And therefore what I suffered that morning was evil for me, but for others perhaps was good, the 
sweetest of good things: thus I understand now that my distress was not due to the depravity of my 
thoughts, in themselves worthy and sweet, but to the depravity of the gap between my thoughts and 
the vows I had pronounced. And therefore I was doing evil in enjoying something that was good in 
one situation, bad in another; and my fault lay in trying to reconcile natural appetite and the 
dictates of the rational soul. Now I know that I was suffering from the conflict between the 
illicit appetite of the intellect, in which the will's rule should hqve been displayed, and the 
illicit appetite of the senses, subject to human passions. In fact, as Aquinas says, the acts of 
the sensitive appetite are called passions precisely because they involve a bodily change.
And my appe†i†ive ac† was, as i† happened, accompanied by a trembling of †he whole body, by a 
physical impulse to cry out and to writhe. The angelic doctor says that the passions in themselves 
ore not evil, but they must be governed by the will led by the rational soul. But my rational soul 
that
morning was dazed by weariness, which kept in check the irascible appetite, addressed to good and 
evil as terms of conquest, but not the concupiscent appetite, addressed to good and evil as known 
entities. To justify my irresponsible recklessness of that time, I will say now that I was 
unquestionably seized by love; which is passion and is cosmic law, because †he weigh† of bodies is 
actually natural love. And by this passion I was naturally seduced, and I understood why the 
angelic doctor soid that amor est magis cognitivus quam cognitio, that we know things better 
through love than through knowledge. In fact, I now saw the girl better than I had seen her the 
previous night, and I understood her intus et in cute becouse in her I understood myself and in 
myself her. I now wonder whether what I felt was the love of friendship, in which like loves like 
and wants only the other's good, or love of concupiscence, in which one wants one‘s own good and 
the lacking wants only what completes it. And I believe that the nighttime love had been 
concupiscent, for I wanted from the girl something I had


never had; whereas that morning I wctnted nothing from the girl, and I wanted only her good, and I 
wished her †o be saved from †he cruel necessity †ha† drove her †o bor†er herself for a bi† of food, 
and I wished her to be happy; nor did I want to ask anything further of her, but only to think of 
her and see her in sheep, oxen, trees, in the serene light that bathed in happiness the grounds of 
the abbey.

Now I know that good is cause of love and that which is good is defined by knowledge, and you can 
only love what you have learned is good, whereas I had, indeed, learned that the girl was the good 
of the irascible appetite, but the evil of the will. But I was in the grip of so many and such 
conflicting emotions, because what I felt was like the holiest love just as the doctors describe 
it: it produced in me that ecstasy in which lover and beloved want the same thing (and by 
mysterious enlightenment I, in thot moment, knew thot the girl, wherever she was, wanted the some 
things I myself wanted), and for her I felt jealousy, but not the evil kind, condemned by Paul in I 
Corinthians, but thot which Dionysius speaks of in The Divine Names whereby God also is called 
jealous because of the 9•eat love He feels for all creation (and I loved the girl precisely becouse 
she existed, and I was happy, not envious, thot she existed): I was jealous in the way in which, 
for the angelic doctor, jealousy is motus in amatum, the jealousy of friendship, which inspires us 
to move ctgqinst qII that hctrms the beloved (and I dreamed, at that moment: only of freeing the 
girl from the power of him who was buying her flesh and befouling it with his own infamous 
passions).

Now I know, as the doctor sqys, that love can harm the lover when it is excessive. And mine was 
excessive. I have tried to explain what I felt then, not in the least to justify what I felt. I am 
speaking of what were my sinful ardors of youth. They were bad, but truth obliges me to say that at 
the time I felt them to be extremely good. And let this serve to instruct anyone who may fall, as I 
did, into the nets of temptation. Today, an old man, I would know a thousand ways of evading such 
seductions. And I wonder how proud of them I should be, since I am free of the temptcttions of the 
noontime Devil; but not free from others, so that I ask myself whether what I am now doing is not a 
sinful succumbing to the terrestrial passion of recollection, a foolish attempt to elude the flow 
of time, and death.

Then, I soved myself as if by miraculous instinct. The girl appeored to me in nature and in the 
works of man that surrounded me. I sought then, thanks to a happy intuition of my soul, to lose 
myself in the relaxed con†empIa†ion of †hose works. I observed †he cowherds as †hey led †he oxen 
ou† of †he stoble, the swineherds taking food to the pigs, the shepherds shouting to the dogs to 
collect the sheep, peasants carrying cracked wheat and millet to the mills and coming out with 
sacks of good food. I lost myself in the contemplation of nature, trying to forget my thoughts and 
to look only at beings as they appear, and to forget myself, joyfully, in the sight of them.
How beautiful was the spectacle of nature not yet touched by the often perverse wisdom of man!
I saw the lamb, to which this name was given as if in recognition of its purity and goodness. In 
fact the noun “agnus“ derives from the fact that this animal "agnoscit”: it recognizes its mother, 
and recognizes her voice in the midst of the flock while the mother, omong many lambs of the same 
form, with the same bleating, recognizes always and only her offspring, and nourishes him. I saw 
the sheep, which is called from “ab oblatione“ because from earliest times it served for 
sacrificial rites; the sheep, which, as is its habit as winter approaches, seeks grass greedily and 
stuffs itself with forage


before the pastures are seared by frost. And the flocks were wcttched by dogs, called “canes” from
†he verb “canor” becouse of †heir barking. The perfec† animal among animals, wi†h superior gif†s of 
perception, the dog recognizes its master and is trained to hunt wild animals in the forests, to 
guard flocks against wolves: it protects the master's house and his children, and sometimes in its 
office of defense it is killed. King Gqramant, who had been tqken away to prison by his enemies, 
wqs brought back †o his homeland by a pack of †wo hundred dogs who made †heir way pas† †he enemy 
†roops; †he dog of, Jason Licius, after its master's death, persisted in refusing food until it 
died of starvation; and the dog of King Lysimachus threw himself on his master's funeral pyre, to 
die with him. The dog has the power to heal wounds by licking them with his tongue, and the tongue 
of his puppies con heal intestinal lesions. By nature he is accustomed to making second use of the 
same food, after vomiting it. His sobriety is the symbol of perfection of spirit, as the 
thaumaturgical power of his tongue is the symbol of the purification of sins through confession and 
penance. But the dog's returning to his vomit is also a sign that, after confession, we return to 
the some sins as before, and this moral was very useful to me that morning to admonish my heart, as 
I admired the wonders of nature.

Meanwhile, my steps were taking me to the oxen‘s stable, where they were coming out in great 
number, led by their drovers. They immediately appeared to me as they were and are, symbols of 
friendship and goodness, because every ox a† his work †urns †o seek his companion a† †he plow; if 
by chance the partner is absent at that moment, the ox calls him with affectionate lowing. Oxen 
learn obediently to go back by, themselves to the barn when it rains, and when they take refuge at 
the
manger, they constantly stretch their necks to look out and see whether the bad weather has 
stopped, because they are eager to resume work. With the oxen a† †ha† momen† also came from the 
barn the calves, whose name, “vituli,” derives from “viriditas,” or from “virgo,” because at that 
age they are still fresh, young, and chaste, and I had done wrong and was still wrong, I said to 
myself, to see in their graceful movements on image of the girl who was not chaste. I thought of 
these things, again at peace with the world and with myself, observing the merry toil of that 
morning hour. And I thought no more of the girl, or, rather, I made an effort to transform the 
ardor I felt for her into a sense of inner happiness and devout peace.

I said to myself thctt the world was good ctnd ctdmirqble. That the goodness of God is mctde 
mctnifest also in the most horrid beasts, as Honorius Augustoduniensis explains. It is true, there 
are serpents so huge that they devour stags and swim across the ocean, there is the bestia 
cenocroca with an ass‘s body, †he horns of an ibex, †he ches† and maw of a lion, a horse's hoofs 
bu† cloven like an ox's, a sli† from the mouth that reaches the ears, an almost human voice, and in 
the ploce of teeth a single, solid bone. And there is the manticore, with a man's face, triple set 
of teeth, lion's body, scorpion‘s tail, glaucous eyes the color of blood, and a voice like the 
hissing of snakes, greedy for human flesh. And there are monsters with eight toes, wolfs muzzle, 
hooked talons, sheep's fleece, and dog's back, who in old age turn block instead of white, and who 
outlive us by many years. And there are creatures with eyes on their shoulders and two holes in the 
chest instead of nostrils, because they lack a hend, and others †ha† dwell along the river Ganges 
who live only on the odor of a certain apple, and when they go away from it they die. But even all 
these foul beasts sing in their variety the praises of the Creator and His wisdom, as do the dog 
and the ox, the sheep and the lamb and the lynx. How great, I said to myself then, repeating the 
words of Vincent gelovacensis, the humblest beauty of this world, and how pleasing to the eye of 
reason the consideration of not only the modes and numbers and orders of things, so decorously 
established for the whole universe, but also the cycle of times that constantly unravel through 
successions and lapses, marked by the death of what has been born. I confess that,


sinner as I am, my soul only for a little while still prisoner of the flesh, I was moved then by 
spiritual sweetness toward the Creator and the rule of this world, and with joyous veneration I 
admired the greatness and the stability of creation.


I was in this good frame of mind when my master came upon me. Drawn by my feet and without 
realizing i†, I had almos† circled †he abbey, and found myself back where we had par†ed †wo hours 
before. There was William, and what he told me jolted me from my thoughts and directed my mind 
again †o †he obscure mysteries of †he abbey.

William seemed well pleased. In his hand he had Venantius‘s parchment, which he had finally 
deciphered. We went to his cell, far from indiscreet ears, ond he translated for me whot he hod 
reod. After the sentence in zodiacal alphabet (Secretum finis Africae manus supra idolum primum et 
sep†imum de qua†uor), †his is who† †he Greek †ex† soid:

The terrible poison that gives purification . The best weapon for destroying the enemy ...
Use humble persons, base and ugly, take pleasure from their defect. ... They must not die.  Not in 
the
houses of the noble and the powerful bu† from the peasants' villages, after abundon† meal and 
libations ... Squat bodies, deformed faces.

They rape virgins ond lie with whores, not evil, without fear. A different truth, o different image 
of the truth
The venerable figs.

The shameless stone rolls over the ploin.  Before the eyes.

Deceit is necessary and to surprise in deceit, to say the opposite of what is believed, to say one 
thing and mean another.

To them the cicadas will sing, from the ground.

Thot was oil. In my opinion too little, olmost nothing. The words seemed the savings of a madman, 
and I said Its much †o William.

“Perhaps. And it surely seems even madder thanks to my translation. My knowledge of Greek is rather 
scanty. And yet, even if we assume that Venantius was mad or that the author of the book was mad, 
this would not tell us why so many people, not all of them mad, went to great trouble, first to 
hide the book and †hen †o recover i†. “

"But do the things written here come from the mysterious book*”



“They are unquestionably things written by Venantius. You can see for yourself: this is not an 
ancient parchment. And these must be notes taken down while he was reading the book; otherwise 
Venantius would not have written in Greek. He has certainly copied, condensing them, some sentences 
he found in
†he book s†oIen from †he finis Africae. He carried i† †o †he scrip†orium and begctn †o read i†, 
no†ing down what seemed to him noteworthy. Then something happened. Either he felt ill, or he heard 
someone coming up. So he pu† †he book, wi†h his no†es, under his desk, probably planning †o pick i† 
up again the next evening.. In any case, this page is our only possible starting point in 
re-creating the nature of the mysterious book, and it's only from the nature of thot book that we 
will be able to infer the nature of the murderer. For in every crime committed to possess an 
object, the nature of the object should give us an idea, however faint, of the nature of the 
assassin. If someone kills for a handful of gold, he will be a greedy person; if for a book, he 
will be anxious to keep for himself the secrets of thot book. So we must find out what is said in 
the book we do not hove.”

“And from these few lines will you be able to understand what thot book is*”

“Dear Adso, these seem like the words of a holy text, whose meaning goes beyond the letter. Reading 
them this morning, after we had spoken with the cellarer, I was struck by the fact that here, too, 
there are references to the simple folk and to peasants as bearers of a truth different from that 
of the wise. The cellarer hinted that some strange complicity bound him to Malachi. Can Malachi 
have hidden a dangerous heretical text that Remigio had entrusted to him* Then Venantius would have 
read and anno†a†ed some mysterious ins†ruc†ions concerning o community of rough and base men in 
revol† against everything and everybody. But ...”

“Bu†*”

“But two focts work against this hypothesis of mine. The first is that Venontius didn't seem 
interested in such questions: he was a translator of Greek texts, not a preacher of heresies. The 
other is that sentences like the ones about the figs and the stone and the cicadas would not be 
explained by this first hypothesis.  ”
“Perhaps they are riddles with another meaning,” I ventured. “Or do you have another hypothesis*” 
“I hove, but it is still vague. It seemed to me, as I read this page, that I had read some of these
words before, and some phrases that are almost the same, which I have seen elsewhere, return to my 
mind. It seems to me, indeed, that this page speaks of something there has been talk about during 
these past days.  But I cannot recall what. I must think it over. Perhaps I'll have to read other
books.”
“Why* To know wha† one book says you mus† read o†hers*”

“At times this can be so. Often books speak of other books. Often a harmless book is like a seed 
that will blossom into a dangerous book, or i† is the other way around: i† is the swee† frui† of a 
bitter stem. In reading Albert, couldn't I learn what Thomas might hove said* Or in reading Thomas, 
know what Averro4s said*”


"True," I said, amazed. Until then I had thought each book spoke of the things, human or divine, 
that lie outside books. Now I realized †ha† no† infrequently books speak of books: i† is as if †hey 
spoke among themselves. In the light of this reflection, the library seemed all the more disturbing 
to me. It was then the place of a long, centuries-old murmuring, an imperceptible dialogue between 
one parchmen† and another, q living †hing, a receptacle of powers no† †o be ruled by ct humon mind, 
a treasure of secrets emanated by many minds, surviving the death of those who had produced them or 
had been their conveyors.

"But then," I soid, "what is the use of hiding books, if from the books not hidden you can arrive 
at the concealed ones*"
"Over the centuries it is no use at all. In a space of years or days it has some use. You see, in 
fact, how bewildered we are."

"And is a library, then, an instrument not for distributing the truth but for delaying its 
appeorance*" I asked, dumbfounded.
"Not always and not necessarily. In this case it is."

SEXT

In which Adso goes hunting for truffles and sees the Minorites arriving they confer at length with 
William and Ubertino, and very sad things are learned about John XXII.

After these considerations my mctster decided to proceed no further. I hctve alrectdy sctid thqt he 
occasionally had moments of total inactivity, as if the ceaseless cycle of the stars had stopped, 
and he with it and with them. And so it was that morning. He stretched out on his pallet, staring 
into the void, his hands folded on his chest, barely moving his lips, as if he were reciting a 
prayer, but irregularly and wi†hou† devotion.
I thought he was thinking, and I resolved to respect his meditation. I returned to the courtyard 
and saw that the sun had grown weaker. Beautiful and clear as it had been, the morning (as the day 
approached the completion of its first half) was becoming damp and misty. Heovy clouds moved from 
the north and were invading the top of the mountain, covering it with a light brume. It seemed to 
be fog, and perhaps fog was also rising from the round, but at that altitude it was difficult to 
distinguish
†he mis†s †ha† rose from below and †hose †ha† came down from above. I† was becoming hard †o discern 
the bulk of the more distant buildings.

I saw Severinus gaily assembling the swineherds and some of their animals. He told me he was going 
to descend along the mountain slopes, and into the valley, to hunt for truffles. I wasn‘t familiar 
with that choice fruit of the underbrush, which was found in the peninsula and seemed typical 
especially of the Benedictine domains, whether at Norcia—the black ones—or in these lands—the white 
and more aromatic. Severinus explained to me what a truffle was, and how tasty, when prepared in 
the most diverse ways. And he told me it was very difficult to find, because it was hidden 
underground, more secre† †han a mushroom, and †he only animals capable of unearthing i† were pigs, 
following †heir smell.


But on finding it they wanted to devour it themselves, and they had to be chased off at once, so 
that you could step in and dig up the truffle. I learned later that mony lords did not disdain to 
join this hunt, following the pigs as if they were noblest hounds, and followed, in turn, by 
servants with hoes. I remember, indeed, that in later years a lord of my country, knowing I was 
acquainted with Italy, asked me why, as he had seen down there, some lords went out to pasture 
their pigs; and I laughed, realizing thot, on the contrary, they were going in search of truffles. 
But when I told him that these lords hoped to find the “truffle” underground,. to eat it, he 
thought I had said they were seeking “der Teufel,” the Devil, and he blessed himself devoutly, 
looking at me in amazement. Then the misunderstanding was cleared up and we both laughed at it. 
Such is the magic of human languages, that by human accord often the same sounds mean different 
thin9•
My curiosity aroused by Severinus‘s preparations, I decided to follow him, also because I realized 
he was turning to this hunt in order to forget the sod events thot oppressed everyone: and I 
thought that in helping him to forget his thou9htsI would perhaps, if n * * •9et, at least restrain 
my own. Nor will I deny, since I have determined to write always and only the truth, that I was 
secretly lured by the idea thot, down in the valley, I might perhaps glimpse someone I will not 
mention. But to myself and almost aloud I declared that, since the two legations were expected to 
arrive that day, I might perhaps sight one of them.
As we gradually descended the curves of the mountain, the air became clearer. Not that the sun 
returned, for the upper part of the sky was heavy with clouds, but things stood out sharply, even 
as
†he fog remained obove our heads. Indeed, when we had gone some distance, I †urned †o look up o† 
†he top of the mountain and could no longer see anything. From the halfway point upward, the 
summit, the high plain, the Aedificium—everything had disappeared among the clouds.

The morning of our arrival, when we were already among the mountains, at certain bends it was still 
possible to view the sea, no more than ten miles away, perhaps even less. Our journey had been rich 
in surprises, because suddenly we would find ourselves on a kind of terrace in the mountain, which 
fell sharply down to beautiful bays, and then a little later we would enter deep chasms, where 
mountains rose ctmong mountains, and one blocked from another the sight of the distant shore, while 
the sun could hardly force its way into the deep valleys. Never before had I seen, as I saw in that 
part of Italy, such narrow and sudden juttings of sea and mountains, of shores followed by alpine 
landscapes, and in the wind that whistled among the gorges you could catch the alternate conflict 
of the marine balms with icy mountain gusts.

That morning, however, all was gray, almost milky white, and there were no horizons even when the 
gorges opened out toward the distant shores. But I am dwelling on recollections of little interest 
as for as our story goes, my patient reader. So I will not narrate the ups and downs of our search 
for “der Teufel,” and I will tell, rather, of the legation of Friars Minor, which I was the first 
to sight. I ran a† once to the monastery to inform William.

My master waited till the newcomers had entered and been greeted by the abbot according to the 
ritual. Then he went to meet the group, and there was a series, of fraternal embroces ond 
salutations.

The meal hour had already passed, but a table had been set for the guests, and the abbot 
thoughtfully left us among them; alone with William, exempted from the obligations of the Rule, 
they were free to


eat and ctt the same time exchan9e their impressions. After all, it was, God forgive me the 
unpleasant simile, like a council of war, †o be held as quickly as possible before †he enemy hos†, 
namely †he Avignon legation, could arrive.

Needless to say, the newcomers qlso promptly met Ubertino, whom qll greeted with surprise, joy, 
venero†ion inspired no† only by his long absence and by †he fears surrounding his disappeorance, 
bu† also by the qualities of that courageous warrior who for decades had fought their same battle.

Of the friars thot mode up the group I will speok later, when I tell about the next day's meeting. 
For that matter, I talked very little with them at first, involved as I was in the three-man 
conference promptly established between William, Ubertino, and Michael of Cesena.

Michael must have been a truly strange man: most ardent in his Franciscan passion (he had at times 
the gestures, the accents of Ubertino in his moments of mystical transport); very human and jovial 
in his earthly no†ure, a man of †he Romogna, capable of appreciating a good †abIe and happy †o be 
among his friends. Subtle and evasive, he could abruptly become sly and clever as a fox, elusive as 
a mole, when problems of relcttions among the mighty were touched upon; capctble of grectt 
outbursts of laughter, fervid tensions, eloquent silences, deft in turning his gaze away from his 
interlocutor if the latter‘s question required him to conceal, with what seemed absent-mindedness, 
his refusal to reply.

I have already spoken a bit about him in the preceding pages, and those were things I had heard 
said, perhaps by persons †o whom †hey had been said. Now, on †he o†her hand, I understood be††er 
many of his contradictory attitudes and the sudden changes of political strategy that in recent 
years had amazed his own friends and followers. Minister, general of the order of the Friars Minor, 
he was in principle the heir of Saint Francis, and actually the heir of his interpreters: he had to 
compete with the sanctity qnd wisdom of such q predecessor as Bonaventure of Bqgnoregio; he had to 
assure respect for the Rule and, at the same time, the fortunes of the order, so powerful and vast; 
he had to keep an eye on the courts and on the city magistrates from whom the order, though in the 
guise of alms, received gifts and bequests, source of prosperity and wealth; and at the some time 
he had to make sure thqt the requirement of penance did not lectd the more ardent Spirituals to 
ctbqndon the order, sco††ering †ha† splendid community of which he was †he heod, in a cons†elIa†ion 
of bands of heretics. He had to please the Pope, the Emperor, the Friars of the Poor Life, and 
Saint Francis, who was certainly watching over him from heaven, as well as the Christian people, 
who were watching him from the earth. When John had condemned all Spirituols as heretics, Michael 
had not hesitated to hond over to him five of the most unruly friars of Provence, allowing the 
Pontiff to burn them at the stake. But realizing (and Ubertino may have had some share in this) 
that many in the order sympathized with the followers of evangelical simplicity, Michael had then 
acted in such a way that the chapter of Perugia, four years later, took up the demands of the 
burned men, naturally trying to reconcile a need, which could be heretical, with the ways and 
institutions of the order, and trying to harmonize the desires of the order and those of the Pope. 
gut, as Michael was busy convincing the Pope, without whose consent he would have been unable to 
proceed, he had been willing also to accept the favors of the Emperor and the imperial theologians. 
Two years before the day I saw him he had yet enjoined his monks, in the chapter general of Lyons, 
to speak of the Pope's person only with moderation and, respect (and this was just a few months 
after the Pope, referring to the Minorites, had complained of their yelping, their errors, their 
insanities“). But here he was at table, friendly, with persons who spoke of the Pope with less than 
no respect.



I hove alreody told the rest of the story. John wonted him at Avignon. He himself wanted and did 
not want to go, and the next day's meeting was to decide on the form and guarantees of a journey 
that should no† appear as an ac† of submission or as an ac† of defiance. I don’† believe Michael 
had ever met John personally, at leqst not qs pope. In any event, he hqdn't seen him for a long 
time, and Michoel‘s friends hastened to paint the portroit of that simoniac in the darkest hues.

“One thing you must learn,” William said to him, “is never to trust his oaths, which he always 
maintains to the letter, violating their substance.”

“Everyone knows,” Ubertino said, “what happened at the time of his election. ”

“I wouldn‘t call it on election, but an imposition!” one man at the table cried, a man I later 
heard them call Hugh of Newcastle, whose accent was similar to my master's. “For that matter, the 
death of Clement the Fifth itself was never very clear. The King had never forgiven him for having 
promised to try Boniface the Eighth posthumously and then doing everything he could to avoid 
repudiating his predecessor. Nobody rectlly knows how Clement died, at Carpentras. The fact is that 
when the cardinals met in Carpentras for the conclave, the new Pope didn‘t materialize, because 
(quite rightly) the argument shifted to the choice between Avignon and Rome. I don't know exactly 
what happened at that time—it was a massacre, I'm told—with the cardinals threatened by the nephew 
of the dead Pope, their servants slaughtered, the palace set afire, the cardinals appealing to the 
King, who says he never wanted the Pope to desert Rome and they should be patient and make a good 
choice.  Then Philip the
Fair died, again God only knows how. ”
“Or the Devil knows,” Ubertino said, blessing himself, in which he was imitated by all the others.
“Or the Devil knows,” Hugh agreed, with a sneer. "Anyway, another king succeeds, survives eighteen 
months, and dies. His newborn heir also dies in a few days' time, and the regent, the King's 
brother, assumes the throne. “

“And †his is Philip †he Fif†h. The very one who, when he was s†iII Coun† of Poitiers, stopped †he 
cardinals who were fleeing from Carpentras,” Michael said.

“Yes,” Hugh went on. “He puts them agoin into conclave in Lyons, in the Dominicans' convent, 
swearing he will defend their safety ctnd not keep them prisoner. But once they place themselves in 
his power, he does not just have them locked up (which is the custom, after all), but every day 
reduces their food until they come to a decision. And each one promises to support his claim to the 
throne. When he does assume the throne, the cardinals are so weary of being prisoners after two 
years, and so afraid of staying there for the rest of their lives, eating badly, that they a9reeto 
everything, the gluttons,
and on the throne of Peter they put that gnome, who is now over seventy. ”
“Gnome, yes, true,” Ubertino said, laughing. “And rather consumptive-looking, but stronger and 
shrewder than anyone thought!”
“Son of a cobbler,” one of the legates grumbled.


“Christ was the son of a carpenter,” Ubertino reproached him. “That is not the point. He is q 
cultivated man, he studied law at Montpellier and medicine in Paris, he cultivated his friendships 
in the ways best suited to win the episcopal seats and the cardinal‘s hat when it seemed opportune 
to him, and as counselor of Robert the Wise in Naples he amazed many with his acumen. When Bishop 
of Avignon, he gave qll the right advice (right, thqt is, for the outcome of thqt squalid venture) 
to Philip the Fair about how to ruin the Templars. And after his election he managed to foil a plot 
of cardinols who wanted to kill him.  But this is not what I meant to talk about: I was speaking of 
his ability to
betray vows without being accused of swearing falsely. To be elected, he promised Cardinal Orsini 
he would return the papal seat to Rome, ond when he wos elected he swore on the consecroted host 
that if he were not to keep his promise, he would never mount a horse or a mule again. Well, you 
know what thot fox did* After he had himself crowned in Lyons (against the will of the King, who 
wanted the ceremony to take ploce in Avignon), he traveled from Lyons to Avignon by boot!”

The monks all laughed. The Pope was a perjurer, but there was no denyin9 he had a certain 
ingeniousness.

“He is without shctme,” William remarked. “Didn't Hugh scty that John made no ctttempt to conceal 
his bad fai†h* Haven’† you, Ubertino, †old abou† wha† he soid †o Orsini on †he day of his arrival 
in Avignon*”

“To be sure,” Ubertino said. “He said to him that the sky of France was so beautiful he could not 
see why he should set foot in a city full of ruins, like Rome. And inosmuch os the Pope, like 
Peter, had the power to bind and to loosen, he was now exercising this power: and he decided to 
remain where he was, where he enjoyed being. And when Orsini tried to remind him that it was his 
duty to live on the Vatican hill, he recalled him sharply to obedience and broke off the 
discussion. But I have not finished the story of the oqth. On disembarking from the boat, John was 
to hqve mounted a white horse, to be followed by the cardinals on black horses, according to 
tradition. Instead he went to the episcopal palace on foot. Nor have I ever heard of his riding a 
horse again. And this is the man, Michael, you expect to abide by the guarantees he will give you*”

Michoel remained silent for a long time. Then he said, “I can understand the Pope's wish to remain 
in Avignon, and I will not dispute it. But he cannot dispute our desire for poverty and our 
interpretation of the example of Christ.”

“Don‘t be ingenuous, Michael,” William spoke up, “your wishes, ours, mctke his appear sinister. You 
must realize that for centuries a greedier man has never ascended the papal throne. The whore of 
Babylon agains† whom our Ubertino used †o fuImina†e, †he corrup† popes described by †he poe†s of 
your country, like that Alighieri, were meek lambs and sober compared to John. He is a thieving 
magpie, a Jewish usurer; in Avignon there is more trafficking thqn in Florence! I have learned of 
the ignoble transaction with Clement's nephew, Bertrand of Goth, he of the slaughter of Carpentras 
(during which, incidentally, the cardinals were relieved of all their jewels). He had laid his 
hands on his uncle's treasure, which was no trifle, and John had not overlooked anything Bertrand 
had stolen: to the Cum venerobiles John lists precisely the coins, the gold and silver vessels, the 
books, rugs, precious stones, ornaments. ... John, however, pretended no† †o know †ha† ger†rond had 
seized more than a million and a half gold florins during the sack of Carpentras; he questioned 
another thirty thousand florins Bertrand confessed he had received from his uncle for a 'pious 
cause,’ namely for a crusade. It was


agreed that Bertrand would keep hctlf the sum for the crusade and donate the other half to the 
papctl throne. Then Bertrand never made the crusade, or at least he has not made it yet, and the 
Pope has not seen a florin.  “

“He is not so clever, then,” Michael remarked.

“That was the only time he has been outwitted in a matter of money,” Ubertino said. “You must know 
well the kind of tradesman you will be dealing with. In every other situation he has displayed a 
diabolical skill in collecting money. He is a Midas: everything he touches becomes gold and flows 
in†o the coffers of Avignon. Whenever I entered his apartments I found bankers, moneychangers, and 
tables laden with gold, clerics counting florins and piling them neatly one on top of another.  And 
you
will see the palace he has had built for himself, with riches that were once attributed only to the 
Emperor of Byzantium or the Great Khan of the Tortars. And now you understand why he issued all 
those bulls against the ideal of poverty. But do you know that he has driven the Dominicans, to 
their hatred of our order, to carve statues of Christ with a royal crown, a tunic of purple and 
gold, and sumptuous sandals* In Avignon they display crucifixes where Christ is nailed by a single 
hand while the other touches a purse hanging from his belt, to indicate thctt he authorizes the use 
of money for religious ends.  ”
“Oh, how shameless!” Michael cried. “But this is outright blasphemy!”
“He has added,” William went on, “a third crown to the papal tiara, hasn't he, Ubertino*” 
“Certainly. At the beginning of the millennium Pope Hildebrand had assumed one, with the legend
’Corona regni de manu Dei'; the infamous Boniface later added a second, writing on it ’Diadema 
imperil de mctnu Petri”, and John has simply perfected the symbol: three crowns, the spiritual 
power, the temporal, and †he ecclesiastical. A symbol wor†hy of †he Persian kings, a pagan symbol 
.. “

There was one monk who till then had remained silent, busily ond devoutly consuming the good dishes 
the abbot had sent to the table. With an absent eye he followed the various discussions, emitting 
every now and then o sarcastic lough at the Pope‘s expense, or a grunt of approval at the other 
monks' indignant exclamations. But otherwise he was intent on wiping from his chin the juices and 
bits of meat that escaped his toothless but voracious mouth, and the only times he had spoken a 
word to one of his neighbors were to praise some delicacy. I learned later that he was Moster 
Jerome, thot Bishop of Kaffa whom, a few days before, Ubertino had thought dead. (I must add that 
the news of his death two years earlier continued to circulate as the truth throughout Christendom 
for a long time, because I also heard it afterward. Actually, he died a few months after that 
meeting of ours, and I still think he died of the great anger thot filled him at the next day‘s 
meeting: I would almost believe he exploded at once, so fragile was he of body and so bilious of 
humor.)

At this point he intervened in the discussion, speaking with his mouth full: “And then, you know, 
the villain issued a constitution concerning the taxae sacrae poenitentiariae in which he exploits 
the sins of religious in order to squeeze out more money. If an ecclesiastic commits a carnal sin, 
with a nun, wi†h a relative, or even wi†h an ordinary womon (because †his olso happens!), he con be 
obsolved only by paying sixty-seven gold pieces and twelve pence. And if he commits bestiality,. it 
is more than two hundred pieces, but if he has committed it only with youths or animals, and not 
with females, the fine


is reduced by one hundred. And a nun who has given herself to many men, either qll at once or at 
differen† †imes, inside †he conven† or ou†, if she †hen won†s †o become obbess, mus† pay one 
hundred thirty-one gold pieces and fifteen pence.  “

“Come, come, Messer Jerome,” Ubertino protested, “you know how little I love the Pope, but on this 
point I must defend him! It is a slander circulated in Avignon. I have never seen this 
constitution!”
“It exists,” Jerome declared vigorously. “I have not seen it, either, but it exists.”
Ubertino shook his head, and the others fell silent. I realized they were accustomed to not paying 
great heed to Master Jerome, whom William had called a fool the other day. William tried to resume 
the conversation: “In any case, true or false as it may be, this rumor tells us the moral climate 
of Avignon, where all, exploited and exploiters, know they are living more in a market than at the 
court of Christ's vicar. When John ascended the throne there was talk of a treasure of seventy 
thousand florins and now there are those who say he has amassed more than ten million.”
“It is true,” Ubertino said. “Ah, Michael, Michael, you have no idea of the shameful things I had 
to see
in Avignon!”

“Let us try to be honest,” Michael said. “We know that our own people have also committed excesses. 
I have been told of Franciscans who made armed attacks on Dominican convents and despoiled their 
rival monks †o impose poverty on †hem.  This is why I dared no† oppose John a† †he †ime of †he 
even†s in
Provence. ... I want to come to an agreement with him; I will not humiliate his pride, I will only 
ask him not to humiliate our humility. I will not speak to him of money, I will ask him only to 
agree to a sound interpretation of Scripture. And this is what we must do with his envoys tomorrow. 
After all, they are men of theology, and not all will be greedy like John. When some wise men hctve 
determined an in†erpre†o†ion of Scripture, he will no† be able †o—”

“He*” Ubertino interrupted him. “Why, you do not yet know his follies in the field of theology! He 
really wants to bind everything with his own hqnd, on eqrth and in heaven. On earth we hqve seen 
what he does. As for heaven ... Well, he has no† ye† expressed †he ideas I canno† divulge †o 
you—no† publicly, at least—but I know for certain that he has whispered them to his henchmen. He is 
planning some mad if not perverse propositions that would change the very substance of doctrine and 
would deprive our preaching of all power!”
“What are they*” many asked.

“Ask Berengar; he knows, he told me of them.” Ubertino had turned to Berengar Talloni, who over the 
past yectrs had been one of the most determined adversctries of the Pope at his own court. Havin9 
come from Avignon, he had joined the group of the other Franciscans two days earlier and had 
arrived a† †he abbey wi†h †hem.

“It is a murky and almost incredible story,” Berengar said. “It seems John is planning to declare 
that the just will not enjoy the beatific vision until after judgment. For some time he has been 
reflecting on the ninth verse of the sixth chapter of the Apocalypse, where the opening of the 
fifth seal is discussed, where under the altar appear those who were slain for testifying to the 
word of God and


who ask for justice. To each is given a white robe, and they are told to be patient a little 
longer.  A
sign, John argues, that they will not be able to see God in his essence until the last judgment is 
fulfilled.“

“To whom has he said these things*” Michctel asked, horrified.

“So far only to a few intimates, but word has spread; they say he is preparing an open declaration, 
not immediately, perhaps in a few years. He is consulting his theologians. ”
“Ha ha!” Jerome sneered as he ate.

“And, more, it seems that he wants to go further and assert that nor will hell be open before that 
doy not even for the devils!”

“Lord Jesus, assist us!” Jerome cried. “And what will we tell sinners, then, if we cannot threaten 
them with an immediate hell the moment they are dead*”

“We are in the hands of a madman,” Ubertino said. “But I do not understand why he wants to ossert 
these things. ”

“The whole doctrine of indulgences goes up in smoke,” Jerome complained, “and not even he will be 
able
†o sell any of†er †ha†. Why should a pries† who has commi††ed †he sin of bes†iaIi†y pay so many 
gold
pieces to avoid such a remote punishment*”
“Not so remote,” Ubertino said firmly. “The hour is at hand!”

“You know thot, dear brother, but the simple do not know it. This is how things stand!” cried 
Jerome, who no longer seemed to be enjoying his food. “What an evil idea; those preaching friars 
must have put it into his mind.  Ah!” And he shook his head.

“Bu† why*” Michael of Cesena returned †o †his question.

“I don't believe there's a reason,” William said. “It's a test he allows himself, an act of pride. 
He wants to be truly the one who decides for heaven and earth. I knew of these whisperings—William 
of Occam had written me. We shall see in the end whether the Pope has his way or the theologians 
hqve theirs, the voice of the whole church, the very wishes of the people of God, the bishops.  ”

“Oh, on doctrinal matters he can bend even the theologians to his will,” Michael said sadly.

“Not necessarily,” William replied. “We live in times when those learned in divine things have no 
fear of proclaiming the Pope a heretic. Those learned in divine things are in their way the voice 
of the Christian people. And not even the Pope can set himself against them now.”

“Worse, still worse,” Michael murmured, frightened. “On one side a mad pope, on the other the 
people of God, who, even if through the words of His theologians, will soon claim to interpret 
Scripture freely. ”



“Why* Was what your people in Perugia did any different*” William asked.
Michael reacted as if stung. “That is why I want to meet the Pope. We can do nothing if he is not 
in agreement.”
“We shall see, we shall see,” William said in an enigmatic tone.
My master was truly very sharp. How could he foresee that Michael himself would later decide to 
support the theologians of the empire and to support the people in condemning the Pope* How could 
William foresee that, in four years' time, when John was first to pronounce his incredible 
doctrine, there would be an uprising on the part of all Christianity* If the beatific vision was 
thus postponed, how could the dead intercede for the living* And what would become of the cult of 
the saints* It was the Minorites themselves who would open hostilities in condemning the Pope, and 
William of Occam would be in the front rank, stern and implacable in his arguments. The conflict 
was to last for three years, until John, close to death, made partial amends. I heard him 
described, years later, as he appeared in the consistory of December 1334, smaller than he had 
seemed previously, withered by age, eigh†y-five years old and dying, his face pale, and he was †o 
say (†he fox, so clever in playing on words not only to break his own oaths but also to deny his 
own stubbornness): “We confess and believe that the souls separated from the body and completely 
purified are in heaven, in paradise with the angels, and with Jesus Christ, and that they see God 
in His divine essence, clearly, face to face ...” and then, after a pause—it was never known 
whether this was due to his difficulty in breathing or to his perverse desire to underline the last 
clause as adversative—“to the extent to which the state and condition of the separated soul allows 
it.“ The next morning, a Sunday, he had himself laid on a long chair with reclining back, and he 
received the cardinals, who kissed his hand, and he died.

But again I digress, and tell things other thon those I should tell. Yet, ofter all, the rest of 
thot conversation at table does not add much to the understanding of the events I am narrating. The 
Minorites agreed on the stand to be taken the nex† day. They sized up their odversaries one by one. 
They commented with concern on the news, announced by William, of the qrrivql of Bernard Gui. And 
even more on the foct thot Cardinol Bertrond del Poggetto would be presiding over the Avignon 
legation. Two inquisitors were too many: a sign they planned to use the argument of heresy against 
the Minorites.
“So much the worse,” William said. “We will treat them as heretics.”
“No, no,” Michael said, “let us proceed cautiously; we must not jeopardize any possible agreement.”
“As far as I con see,” William said, “thou9h I also worked for the rectlization of this meeting, 
qnd you know it, Michael, I do not believe the Avignonese are coming here to achieve any positive 
result. John wants you at Avignon alone, and without guarantees. But the meeting will have at least 
one function. to make you understand that. It would have been worse if you had gone there before 
having had this experience.”

“And so you have worked hard, and for many months, to bring about something you believe futile,” 
Michael. said bitterly.




“I was asked †o, by †he Emperor ond by you,” William said. ’And uI†ima†ely i† is never o fu†iIe 
†hing †o know one's enemies better.“

At this point they cqme to tell us that the second delegation was coming inside the wqlls. The 
Minorites rose and went out to meet the Pope's men.

NONES
In which Cardinal del Poggetto arrives, with Bernord Gui and the other men of Avignon, and then 
each one does something different.

Men who had already known one another for some time, men who without knowing one another had each 
heard the others spoken of, exchanged greetings in the courtyard with apparent meekness. At the 
abbot's side, Cardinal Bertrand del Poggetto moved like a man accustomed to power, as if he were 
virtuctlly ct second pope himself, and to one qnd all, especially to the Minorites, he distributed 
cordictl smiles, ouguring splendid agreement for the next day‘s meeting and bearing explicit wishes 
for peace and good (he used deliberately this expression dear to the Franciscans) from John XXII.

“Excellent,” he said to me, when William was kind enough to introduce me as his scribe and pupil. 
Then he osked me whether I knew Bologna and he praised its beauty to me, its good food and its 
splendid university, inviting me to visit the city, rather than return one day, as he said, among 
those German people of mine who were making our lord Pope suffer so much. Then he extended his ring 
for me to kiss, as he directed his smile at someone else.

For that matter, my ottention immediately turned to the person of whom I had heard most talk 
recently: Bernard Gui, as the French called him, or Bernardo Guidoni or Bernardo Guido, as he was 
called elsewhere.

He was a Dominican of abou† seventy, slender and erec†. I was s†ruck by his gray eyes, capable of 
staring without any expression; I was to see them often flash with ambiguous light, shrewd both in 
concealing thoughts and passions and in deliberately conveying them.
In the generctl exchan9e of greetings, he was not affectionate or cordial like the others, but 
alwctys and just barely polite. When he saw Ubertino, whom he already knew, he was very 
deferential, but stared at him in a way that gave me an uneasy shudder. When he greeted Michael of 
Cesena, his smile was hard to decipher, and he murmured without warmth, “You hove been awaited 
there for some time,” a sentence in which I was unable to catch either a hint of eagerness or ct 
shadow of irony, either an injunction or, for that matter, a suggestion of interest. He met 
William, and when he learned who he was, he looked at him with polite hostility: not because his 
face betrayed his secret feelings, I was sure of that (even while I was unsure that he harbored any 
feelings at all), but because he certainly wanted William to feel he was hostile. William returned 
his hostility, smiling at him with exaggerated cordiality and saying, “For some time I have been 
wanting to meet a man whose fame has been a lesson to me and an admonition for many important 
decisions that have inspired my life.” Certainly words of praise, almost of flattery, for anyone 
who did not know, as Bernard did know well, that one of the most


important decisions in William's life had been to abandon the position of inquisitor. I derived the 
impression thot, if William would gladly hove seen Bernard in some imperial dungeon, Bernard 
certainly would have been pleased to see William suddenly seized by accidental and immediate death; 
and since Bernard to those days had men-at-arms under his command, I feared for my good master's 
life.

Bernord mus† already have been informed by †he abbo† of †he crimes commi††ed in †he obbey. In lac†, 
pretending to ignore the venom in William‘s words, he said to him, “it seems that now, at the 
abbot's request, and in order to fulfill the mission entrusted to me under the terms of the 
agreement that hos united us oll here, I must concern myself with some very sad events in which the 
pestiferous stink of the Devil is evident. I mention this to you because I know that in remote 
times, when you would hove been closer to me, you fought as did I—and those like me—in that field 
where the forces of good are arroyed against the forces of evil.”

"True," William said calmly, "but then I went over to the other side.“
Bernard took the blow well. "Can you tell me anything helpful about these criminal deeds*“
"No, unfortunately,” William answered with civility. "I do not have your experience of criminal 
deeds.“

From that moment on I lost track of everyone. William, after another conversation with Michael and 
Ubertino, withdrew to the scriptorium. He asked Malachi's leave to examine certain books, but I was 
unoble †o hear †he †i†Ies. Malachi looked a† him oddly bu† could no† deny permission. Strangely, 
†hey did not have to be sought in the library. They were already on Venantius's desk, all of them. 
My master immersed himself in his reading, and I decided not to disturb him.

I went down into the kitchen. There I saw Bernctrd Gui. He probably wanted to comprehend the lqyout 
of †he abbey and was roaming obou† everywhere. I heard him in†erroga†ing †he cooks and o†her 
servants, speaking the local vernacular after a fashion (I recalled that he had been inquisitor in 
northern Italy). He seemed to be asking for information about the harvest, the organization of work 
in the monastery. But even while asking the most innocuous questions, he would look at his 
companion with penetrating eyes, then would abruptly ask another question, and at this point his 
victim would blanch and stammer. I concluded that, in some singular way, he was carrying out an 
inquisition, and was exploiting a formidable weapon that every inquisitor, in the performance of 
his function, possesses and employs: the fear of others. For every person, when questioned, usually 
tells the inquisitor, out of fear of being suspected of something, whatever may serve to make 
somebody else suspect.

For all the rest of the afternoon, as I gradually moved about, I saw Bernard proceed in this 
fashion, whether by the mills or in the cloister. But he almost never confronted monks: always toy 
brothers or peasants. The opposite of William‘s strategy thus far.

VESPERS
In which Alinardo seems to give valuable information, and William reveals his method of arriving ot 
o probable truth through a series of unquestionable errors.


Lqter William descended from the scriptorium in good humor. While we were waitin9 * sUppertime, we 
came upon Alinordo in the cloister. Remembering his request, I had procured some chickpeas the day 
before in the kitchen, and I offered them to him. He thanked me, stuffing them into his
†oo†hIess, drooling mou†h. “You see, boy*” he said. “The o†her corpse also lay where †he book 
announced i† would be.  Now wqi† for †he four†h †rumpe†!”
I asked him why he thought the key to the sequence of crimes lay in the book of Revelation. He 
looked at me, amazed: “The book of John offers the key to everything!” And he added, with a grimace 
of bitterness, “I knew it, I‘ve been saying as much for a long time.  I was the one, you know, to 
suggest
to the abbot ... the one we had then ... to collect as many commentaries on the Apocalypse as 
possible. I was to have become librarian.  But then the other one managed to have himself sent to 
Silos, where
he found the finest manuscripts, and he came back with splendid booty.  Oh, he knew where to look;
he also spoke the language of the infidels.  And so the library was given into his keeping, and not
mine. But God punished him, and sent him into the realm of darkness before his time. Ha ha ” He
laughed in a nasty way, that old man who until then, lost in the serenity of his old age, had 
seemed to me like an innocent child.
“Who was the monk you were speaking of*” William asked.
He looked at us, stunned. “Whom was I speaking of* I cannot remember  it was such a long time ago.
But God punishes, God nullifies, God dims even memories. Many qcts of pride were committed in the 
library. Especially after it fell into the hands of foreigners. God punishes still. ”

We could get no more out of him, and we left him to his calm, embittered delirium. William declared 
himself very interested in that exchonge: “Alinardo is a man to listen to; eoch time he speaks he 
says something interesting.”
“What did he say this time*”
“Adso,” Willictm said, “solving a mystery is not the same cts deducing from first principles. Nor 
does it amoun† simply to collecting a number of particular data from which to infer a general law. 
I† means, rather, facing one or two or three particular data apparently with nothing in common, and 
trying to imagine whether they could represent so many instances of a general law you don't yet 
know, and which perhaps has never been pronounced. To be sure, if you know, as the philosopher 
says, thot man, the horse, and the mule are all without bile and are all long-lived, you can 
venture the principle that animals without bile live a long time. But take the case of animals with 
horns. Why do they have horns* Suddenly you realize that all animals with horns are without teeth 
in the upper jaw This would be a fine discovery, if you did not also realize thot, alas, there are 
animals without teeth in the upper jaw who, however, do not have horns. the camel, to name one. And 
finally you realize that all animals without teeth in the upper jaw hove four stomachs. Well, then, 
you can suppose that one who cannot chew well must need four stomachs to digest food better. But 
what about the horns* You then try to imagine a material cause for horns—say, the lack of teeth 
provides the animal with an excess of osseous matter that must emerge somewhere else. But is that 
sufficient explanation* No, because the camel has no upper teeth, has four stomachs, but does not 
hove horns. And you must also imagine a final cause. The osseous matter emerges in horns only in 
animals without other means of defense. But the camel has a very tough hide and doesn't need horns. 
So the law could be  ”



"But what have horns to do with anything*“ I osked impatiently. “And why are you concerned with
animals having horns*“

“I hctve never concerned myself with them, but the Bishop of Lincoln was greatly interested in 
them, pursuing an idea of Aristotle. Honestly, I don‘t know whether his conclusions are the right 
ones, nor have I ever checked to see where the camel‘s teeth are or how many stomachs he has. I was 
trying to tell you that the search for explicative laws in natural facts proceeds in a tortuous 
fashion. In the face of some inexplicable facts you must try to imagine many general laws, whose 
connection with your facts escapes you. Then suddenly, in the unexpected connection of a result, a 
specific situation, and one of those laws, you perceive a line of reasoning that seems more 
convincing than the others. You try applying i† to all similar cases, to use i† for making 
predictions, and you discover †ha† your intuition was right. gut until you reach the end you will 
never know which predicates to introduce into your reasoning and which to omit. And this is what I 
am doing now. I line up so many disjointed elements and I venture some hypotheses. I have to 
venture many, and many of them are so absurd that I would be ashamed to tell them to you. You see, 
in the case of the horse Brunellus, when I sow the clues I guessed many complementary and 
con†radic†ory hypotheses: i† could be a runaway horse, i† could be
†ho† †he abbo† had ridden down †he slope on †ho† fine horse, i† could be †ha† one horse, Brunellus, 
had left the tracks in the snow and another horse, Favellus, the day before, the traces of mane in 
the bush, and †he branches could have been broken by some men. I didn’† know which hypothesis was 
righ† until I saw the cellarer and the servants anxiously searching. Then I understood that the 
Brunellus hypothesis was the only righ† one, and I tried to prove i† true, addressing the monks as 
I did. I won, but I might also have lost. The others believed me wise because I won, but they 
didn't know the many instances in which I have been foolish because I lost, and they didn't know 
that a few seconds before winning I wasn‘t sure I wouldn‘t lose. Now, for the events of the obbey I 
have mony fine hypotheses, but there is no evident fact thqt allows me to soy which is best. So, 
rather thqn appectr foolish afterward, I renounce seeming clever now. Let me think no more, until 
tomorrow at least.”

I understood at that moment my master's method of reasoning, and it seemed to me quite olien to 
that of the philosopher, who reasons by first principles, so that his intellect almost assumes the 
wqys of the divine intellect. I understood that, when he didn't have on answer, William proposed 
many to himself, very different one from another. I remained puzzled.
"But then ...” I venture to remark, “you are still far from the solution. ”
“I am very close to one,“ William said, “but I don't know which." “Therefore you don‘t have a 
single answer to your questions*” "Adso, if I did I would teach theology in Paris.”
"In Paris do they always have the true answer*”
"Never," William said, "but they are very sure of their errors.”
"And you,” I said with childish impertinence, "never commit errors*"



“Often,” he answered. “But instead of conceiving only one, I imagine many, so I become the slave of
none.”

I hqd the impression thot William was not qt qll interested in the truth, which is nothing but the 
adjustment between the thing and the intellect. On the contrary, he amused himself by imagining how 
many possibilities were possible.

At that moment, I confess, I despaired of my master and caught myself thinking, “Good thing the 
inquisitor has come.” I was on the side of that thirst for truth that inspired Bernard Gui.

And in this culpable mood, more torn than Judas on the night of Holy Thursday, I went with William 
into the refectory to eat my supper.

COMPLINE
In which Salvo†ore †eIIs of a prodigious spell.

The supper for †he legation was superb. The abbo† mus† have known well bo†h human weaknesses and 
the customs of the papal court (which, I must sqy, did not displease Brother Michael's Minorites, 
either). The freshly slaughtered pigs were to hove produced blood pudding according to the Monte 
Cassino recipe, the cook had told us. But Venantius's wretched end had obliged them to throw away 
all the pigs' blood, though they would eventually slaughter some more pigs. I believe that in those 
days everyone abhorred the idea of killing the Lord's creatures. Nevertheless, we had a ragout of 
pigeon, marinaded in the wine of those lands, and roast rabbit, Sqint Clqre's pasties, rice with 
the almonds of those hills—the blanc-monge of fast days, that is—and borage tarts, stuffed olives, 
fried cheese, mutton with a sauce of raw peppers, white broad beans, and exquisite sweets, Saint 
Bernard's cake, Saint Nicholas's pies, Saint Lucy's dumplings, and wines, and herb liqueurs that 
put everyone in a good humor, even Bernard Gui, usually so austere: an elixir of lemon verbena, 
wctlnut wine, wine against the gout, and gentian wine. It seemed an assembly of gluttons, except 
that every sip or every morsel was accompanied by devotional readings.

In the end, all rose very happy, some mentioning vague ailments as an excuse not to go down to 
compline. But the ctbbot did not take offense. Not all have the privilege ctnd the obligations we 
ctssume on being consecrated in our order.

As the monks departed, my curiosity made me linger in the kitchen, where they were preparing to 
lock up for the ni9ht.I saw Salvatore slip off toward the garden with a bundle under his ctrm. My 
curiosity still further aroused, I followed and called him. He tried to evade me, but when I 
questioned him he replied that in the bundle (which moved as if inhabited by something alive) he 
was carrying a basilisk.
“Cove basilischium! The rex of serpenti, tant pleno of poison thot it all shines dehors! Che dicam, 
il veleno, even the stink comes dehors and kills you! Poisons you ... And it has black spots on his 
back, and a head like a coq, and half goes erect over the terra, and half on the terra like the 
other serpents.
And it kills the bellula. ”




"The bellula*“

"Oc! Parvissimum animal, just a bit plus longue than the rat, and also called the musk-rat. And so 
the serpe and †he bo††a. And when †hey bi†e i†, †he bellulq runs †o †he fenicula or †o †he 
cicerbi†q and chews i†, and comes back †o †he ba††agIia. And †hey soy i† genero†es through †he 
oculi, bu† mos† say they are wrong.“

I asked him what he was doing with a basilisk and he said that wos his business. Now completely 
overwhelmed by curiosity, I said that these days, with all the deaths, there could be no more 
secret matters, and I would tell William. Then Solvatore ardently begged me to remain silent, 
opened the bundle, and showed me a black cat. He drew me closer and, with an obscene smile, said 
that he didn‘t want the cellarer, who was powerful, or me, young and handsome, to enjoy the love of 
the villoge girls any more, when he couldn't because he was ugly and a poor wretch. But he knew a 
prodigious spell that would make every woman succumb †o love. You had †o kill a black co† ond dig 
ou† i†s eyes, †hen pu† them in two eggs of a block hen, one eye in one egg, one eye in the other 
(and he showed me two eggs that he swore he had tqken from appropriate hens). Then you had to let 
the eggs rot in a pile of horse dung (and he had one ready in a corner of the vegetoble gorden 
where nobody ever went), and there a little devil would be born from each egg, and would then be at 
your service, procuring for you all the delights of this world. But, alas, he told me, for the 
magic spell to work, the woman whose love he wanted had to spit on the eggs before they were buried 
in the dung, and that problem tormented him, because he would have to have the womon in question at 
hand thot night, and make her perform the ritual without knowing its purpose.

A sudden heat seized me, in the face, or the viscera, or in my whole body, and I asked in a faint 
voice whether that night he would bring the same girl within the walls. He laughed, mocking me, and 
said I was truly gripped by a great lust (I said not, that I was asking out of pure curiosity), and 
then he said there were plenty of women in the village, and he would bring up another, even more 
beautiful than the one I liked. I supposed he was lying to me to make me go away. And in any case 
what could I have done* Follow him all night, when Willictm wqs awaiting me for quite different 
enterprises* And again see her (if it was she) toward whom my appetites drove me while my reason 
drove me away—and whom I should never see again even though I did desire to see her further* Surely 
not. So I persuaded myself that Salvatore was telling the truth, as far as the woman was concerned. 
Or perhaps he was lying about everything, and the spell he described was a fantasy of his nai”ve, 
superstitious mind, and he would not do anything.

I became irritated with him, treated him roughly, told him that for that night he would do better 
to go †o bed, becouse archers were patrolling †he abbey. He answered †ha† he knew †he abbey be††er 
than the archers did, and with this fog nobody would see anybody. Indeed, he said to me, I'm going 
to run off now, and you won't see me any more, even if I were two feet awoy having my pleasure with 
the girl you desire. He expressed himself with different words, but this was the meaning of what he 
said. I left, indignant, because it was unworthy of me, nobleman and novice, to dispute with such 
rabble.

I joined William and we did whot was to be done. That is, we prepared to follow compline at the 
rear of the nave, so that when the office ended we would be ready to undertake our second (for me, 
third) journey in†o †he bowels of †he labyrinth.




AFTER COMPLINE
In which they visit the lctbyrinth again, reach the threshold of the finis Africae, but cannot 
enter because they do not know what the first and seventh of the four are, and, finally, Adso has a 
recurrence, though a very erudite one, of his love malady.
The visit to the library cost us long hours of work. Described in words, the verification we aimed 
to carry out was simple, but our progress by lamplight as we read the legends, marked the passages 
and the blank walls on the map, recorded the initials, followed the various routes that the play of 
openings and obstacles allowed us, was very long. And tedious.
It was bitter cold. The night was not windy and we did not hear those faint whIstIin9• that had 
upset us the first evening, but a damp, icy air entered from the arrow slits. We had put on woolen 
gloves so as to be able to touch the volumes without hoving our hands become numb. But they were 
the kind used for writing in winter, the fingertips left bare, and sometimes we had to hold our 
hands to the flame or put them against our chests or clap them as we hopped about, half frozen.
For this reason we didn't perform the whole task consecutively. We stopped to browse in the cases, 
and now that William—with his new glasses on his nose—could linger and read the books, at every 
title he discovered he let out exclamations of happiness, either because he knew the work, or 
because he had been seeking it for a long time, or finally because he had never heard it mentioned 
and was highly excited and titillated. In short, for him every book was like a fabulous animal that 
he was meeting in a strange land. And as he leafed through one manuscript, he ordered me to look 
for others.
“See what's in that case!”
And I, deciphering and shifting volumes, soid, “Histories anglorum of Bede ... And also by Bede, De 
aedificatione templi, De tabernaculo, De temparibus et computo et chronicct et circuli Dionysi, 
Ortographia, De ratione metrorum, Vita Sancti Cuthberti, Ars metrica ...”
“Naturally, the complete works of the Venerable ... And look at these! De rhetorica cognatione, 
Locorum rhe†oricorum dis†inc†io, and here many grammarians, Priscian, Honora†us, Dona†us, Maximus, 
Victorinus, Eutiches, Phocas, Asper .. Odd, I thou9htat first that here there were authors from 
Anglia. ... Let us look below. ..”
“Hisperico ... famines. What is thot*” "A Hibernian poem. Listen:
Hoc spumans mundanas obvallat Pelagus oras terrestres amniosis fluctibus cudit margines. Saxeas 
undosis molibus irruit avionias.



Infama bomboso ver†ice misce† glareas asprifero spergi† spumas sulco, sonoreis frequentur quotitur 
labras. “
I didn't understand the meaning, but as William read he rolled the words in his mouth so that you 
seemed to heor the sound of the waves and the sea foam.

“And this* Aldhelm of Malmesbury. Listen to this page: ’Primitus pantorum procerum poematorum pio 
potissimum poternoque presertim privilegio panegiricum poemataque passim prosotori sub polo 
promulgates.’  The words all begin with the same letter!”

“The men of my islands are all a bit mad,” William said proudly. “Let us look in the other case.”


“What is he doing here* What Virgil* The Georgics*” “No. Epitomae. I've never heard of it.”
“But it‘s Virgil of Toulouse, the rhetorician, six centuries after the birth of our Lord. He was 
considered great sage. ”

“Here it says that the arts qre poemo, rethoriq, grqmq, leporia, diqlecta, geometric.  But what
language was he writing*”

“Latin. A Latin of his own invention, however, which he considered far more beautiful. Read this; 
he sctys thet ctstronomy studies the signs of the zodiac, which are mon, man, tonte, piron, 
dctmeth, perfellea, belgalic, margaleth, lutamiron, taminon, and raphalut.”

“Was he crazy*”

“I don't know: he didn't come from my islands. And listen to this: he sqys there are twelve ways of 
designating fire: ignis, coquihabin (quia incoc†a coquendi habe† dic†ionem), ardo, calax ex calore, 
fragon ex fragore flammae, rusin de rubore, fumaton, ustrax de urendo, vitius quia pene mortua 
membra suo vivificat, siluleus, quod de silice siliat, unde et silex non recte dicitur, nisi ex qua 
scintilla silit. And aeneon, de Aeneq deo, qua in eo habitat, sive a quo elementis flatus fertur.”
“But there‘s no one who speaks like that!”

“Happily. But those were times when, to forget an evil world, grammarians took pleasure in abstruse 
questions. I was told that in that period, for fifteen days and fifteen nights, the rhetoricians 
Gabundus and Terentius argued on the vocative of ’ego,’ and in the end they attacked each other, 
with weapons.”



“But this, too. Listen. ...” I had grouped a book marvelously illuminated with vegetable labyrinths 
from which monkeys and serpents peered out. “Listen to these words: cantamen, collamen, gongelamen, 
stemiamen, plasmamem, sonerus, alboreus, gaudifluus, glaucicomus.  ”

“My islands,” William said again, with tenderness. “Don't be too harsh with those monks of far-off 
Hibernia. Perhaps, if this abbey exists and if we still speak of the Holy Roman Empire, we owe it 
to them. At that time, the rest of Europe was reduced to a heap of ruins; one day they declared 
invalid all baptisms imparted by certain priests in Gaul because they baptized “in nomine patris et 
filiae‘—and not because they practiced a new heresy and considered Jesus a woman, but because they 
no Ion9er knew any Latin.”
“Like Salvatore*”
“More or less. Vikings from the Far North came down along the rivers to sack Rome. The pagan 
temples were falling in ruins, and the Christian ones did not yet exist. It was only the monks of 
Hibernia in their monasteries who wrote and rectd, read ctnd wrote, and illuminated, and then 
jumped into little boats made of animal hide and navigated toward these lands and evangelized them 
as if you people were infidels, you understand* You have been †o Bobbio, which was founded by Sain† 
Columba, one of them. And so never mind if they invented a new Latin, seeing that in Europe no one 
knew the old Latin any more. They were great men. Saint Brendan reached the Isles of the Blest and 
sailed along the coasts of hell, where he saw Judas chained to a rock, and one day he landed on an 
island and wen† ashore there and found a sea monster. Naturally they were all mad,” he repeated 
contentedly.

“These images are ... I con hardly believe my eyes! So mony colors!” I soid, drinking i† all in.

“From a land thot doesn't have many colors, a bit of blue and much green. But we mustn't stand here 
discussing Hibernian monks. What I want to know is why they are here with the Anglians and with 
grammarians of other countries. Look at your chart: where should we be*”

“In the rooms of the west tower. I've copied down the scrolls, too. So, then, leaving the blind 
room, we enter the heptagonal room, and there is only one passage to a single room of the tower; 
the letter in red is H. Then we go from room †o room, moving around †he †ower, and we re†urn †o †he 
blind room.
The sequence of the letters spells  you are right! HIBERNI!”

“HIBERNIA, if we come from the blind room back into the heptagonal, which, like all the others, has 
the letter A for Apocalypsis. So there are the works of the authors of Ultima Thule, and also the 
grammarians and rhe†oricians, because the men who arranged the library though† †ho† a grammarian 
should remqin with the Hibernian grammarians, even if he came from Toulouse. It is a criterion. You 
see* We are beginning to understand something.”
“But in the rooms of the east tower, where we came in, we read FONS.  What does that mean*”
“Read your map carefully. Keep reading the letters of the rooms that follow, in order of access.” 
“FONS ADAEU ”



“No, Fons Adae; the U is the second east blind room, I remember it; perhaps it fits into another 
sequence. And what did we find in the Fons Adae, that is, in the earthly paradise (remember that 
the room with the altar acing the rising sun is there)*”

“There were many Bibles there, and commentaries on the Bible, only books of Holy Scripture.”

“And so, you see, the word of God corresponding to the earthly paradise, which as all say is far 
off to the east. And here, to the west: Hibernia.”

“So the plan of the library reproduces the map of the world*”

“Thot's probable. And the books are arranged according to the country of their origin, or the place 
where their authors were born, or, as in this instance, the place where they should have been born. 
The librarians told themselves Virgil the grammarian was born in Toulouse by mistake; he should 
have been born in the western islands. They corrected the errors of nature.”

We resumed our way. We passed through o series of rooms rich in splendid Apocalypses, and one of 
these was the room where I had had visions. Indeed, we saw the light again from afar. William held 
his nose and ran to put it out, spitting on the ash. To be on the safe side, we hurried through the 
room, but I recalled that I had seen there the beautiful, many-colored Apocalypse with the mulier 
amicta sole and the dragon. We reconstructed the sequence of these rooms, storting from the one we 
entered last, which had Y as its red initial. Reading backward gave us the word YSPANIA, but its 
final A was also the one that concluded HIBERNIA. A sign, William said, that there were some rooms 
in which works of mixed noture were housed.

In any case, the area denominated YSPANIA seemed to us populated with many codices of the 
Apocalypse, all splendidly made, which William recognized as Hispanic art. We perceived that the 
library had perhaps the largest collection of copies of the apostle‘s book extant in Christendom, 
and an immense quantity of commentaries on the text. Enormous volumes were devoted to the 
commentctry of †he Apocalypse by Bea†us of Liébana. The †ex† was more or less always †he same, bu† 
we found a rich, fantastic variation in the images, and William recognized some of those he 
considered among the greatest illuminators of the realm of the Asturias: Magius, Facundus, and 
others.

As we mqde these and other observations, we arrived qt the south tower, which we had already 
approached the night before. The S room of Yspania—windowless—led into an E room, and after we 
gradually went around the five rooms of the tower, we came to the last, without other passages, 
which bore a red L. Agoin reading backword, we found LEONES.

“Leones: south. On our map we are in Africa, hic sunt leones. And this explains why the have found 
so many †ex†s by infidel authors.”

“And there are more,” I said, rummaging in the cases. “Canon of Avicenna, and this codex with the 
beautiful calligraphy I don't recognize ...”

“From the decorations I would say it is a Koran, but unfortunately I have no Arabic.”




"The Koran, †he Bible of †he infidels, a perverse book ...”

"A book containing a wisdom different from ours. But you understand why they put it here, where the 
lions, the monsters, are. This is why we saw that book on the monstrous animals, where you qlso 
found the unicorn. This areo called LEONES contains the books that the creators of the library 
considered books of falsehood. What's over there*”

“They're in La†in, bu† from †he Arobic. Ayyub aI-Ruhawi, a †rea†ise on conine hydrophobio. And †his 
is a book of treasures. And this is De aspectibus of Alhazen ..."

“You see, among monsters and falsehoods they have also placed works of science from which 
Christians have much to learn. That wos the way they thought in the times when the library was 
built.

“But why have they also put a book with the unicorn among the falsehoods*” I asked.
"Obviously †he founders of †he library had strange ideas. They mus† have believed †ho† †his book 
which speaks of fantastic animals and beasts living in distant lands was part of the catalogue of 
falsehoods spread by the infidels. “

"But is the unicorn a falsehood* It‘s the sweetest of animals and a noble symbol. It stands for 
Christ, and for chastity; it can be captured only by setting a virgin in the forest, so that the 
animal, catching her most chaste odor, will go and lay its head in her lap, offering itself as prey 
to the hunters' snares.”
“So it is sctid, Adso. But many tend to believe that it's ct fable, qn invention of the pagans.”
“What a disappointment,” I said. “I would have liked to encounter one, crossing a wood. Otherwise 
what's the pleasure of crossing a wood*”

"It's not certain the animal doesn't exist. Perhaps it‘s different from the way it's illustrated in 
these books. A Venetian traveler went to very distant lands, quite close to the Ions paradisi of 
which maps tell, and he saw unicorns. But he found them rough and clumsy, and very ugly and black. 
I believe he sow a real animal with one horn on its brow. It was probably the same animal the 
ancient masters first described faithfully. They were never completely mistaken, and had received 
from God the opportunity to see things we haven‘t seen. Then this description, passing from 
auctoritas to auctoritas, was transformed through successive imaginative exercises, and unicorns 
became fanciful animals, white and gentle. So if you hear there‘s a unicorn in a wood, don‘t go 
there with a virgin: the animal migh† resemble more closely †he Venetian’s accoun† †han †he 
description in †his book."
“But did the ancient masters happen to receive from God the revelation of the unicorn's true 
nature*“
“Not the revelation: the experience. They were fortunate enough to be born in lands where unicorns 
live, or in times when unicorns lived in our own lands.“


“But then how can we trust ancient wisdom, whose traces you are always seeking, if it is handed 
down by lying books that have interpreted it with such license*“

"Books are no† made †o be believed, bu† †o be subjected †o inquiry. When we consider a book, we 
mustn't ctsk ourselves what it says but what it mectns, q precept that the commentcttors of the 
holy books had very clearly in mind. The unicorn, as †hese books speak of him, embodies a moral 
†ru†h, or allegorical, or analogical, but one that remains true, as the idea that chastity is a 
noble virtue remains true. But as for the literal truth that sustains the other three truths, we 
have yet to see what original experience love bir†h †o †he Ie††er. The literal objec† mus† be 
discussed, even if i†s higher meaning remains good. In a book it is written that diamond can be cut 
only with a billy goat‘s blood. My great master Roger Bacon said it was not true, simply because he 
had tried and had foiled. But if the relation between a diamond and goat's blood had had a nobler 
meaning, that would hove remained in†oc†.”

"Then higher truths can be expressed while the letter is lying,” I said. "Still, it grieves me to 
think this unicorn doesn't exist, or never existed, or cannot exist one day.”

"I† is no† lici† †o impose confines on divine omnipo†ence, and if God so willed, unicorns could 
olso exis†. But console yourself, they exist in these books, which, if they do not speak of real 
existence, speak of possible existence.”

"So must we then read books without faith, which is a theological virtue*”
"There are two other theological virtues as well. The hope that the possible is. And charity, 
toward those who believed in good foith that the possible was.“

"But what use is the unicorn to you if your intellect doesn't believe in it*”

“It is of use to me as Venantius's prints in the snow were of use, after he was dragged to the 
pigs' tub. The unicorn of the books is like a print. If the print exists, there must have existed 
something whose

"But different from the print, you say.“
“Of course. The print does not always have the same shape as the body that impressed it, and it 
doesn't always derive from the pressure of a body. At times it reproduces the impression a body has 
left in our mind: it is the print of an idea. The idea is sign of things, and the image is sign of 
the idea, sign of a sign. But from the image I reconstruct, if not the body, the ideo that others 
had of it.“

"And this is enough for you*”

"No, because true learning must not be content with ideas, which are, in fact, signs, but must 
discover things in their individual truth. And so I would like to go back from this print of a 
print to the individual unicorn that stands at the beginning of the chain. As I would like to go 
back from the vague signs left by Venantius‘s murderer (signs that could refer to many) to a sole 
individual, the murderer himself. But it isn't always possible in a short time, and without the 
help of other signs.”



“Then I can alwoys and only speak of something that speaks to me of something else, and so on. But 
the final something, the true one—does that never exist*”

“Perhaps it does: it is the individual unicorn. And don't worry: one of these days you will 
encounter it, however black and ugly i† may be.”

“Unicorns, lions, Arab authors, and Moors in general,” I said a† †ha† poin†, “no doub† †his is †he 
Africa of which the monks spoke.”

“No doubt this is it. And if it is, we should find the African poets mentioned by Pacificus of 
Tivoli.”

And, in fac†, when we hod retraced our s†eps and were in room L agoin, we found in o case o 
collection of books by Floro, Fronto, Apuleius, Martianus Capella, and Fulgentius.

“So this is where Berengar said the explanations of a certain secret should be,” I said.

“Almost here. He used the expression 'finis Africae,' and this wos the expression that so 
infuriated Malachi. The finis could be this last room, unless ...” He cried out: “By the seven 
churches of Clonmacnois! Haven't you noticed something*”

“What*”
“Let's go back to room S, where we started!”

We went back to the first blind room, where the verse read “Super thronos viginti qucttuor.” It had 
four openings. One led to room Y, which had a window on the inner octagon. Another led to room P, 
which continued, along the outside fasade, the YSPANIA sequence. The opening toward the tower led 
into room E, which we had just come through. Then there was a blank wall, and finally an opening 
that led in†o a second blind room wi†h †he ini†iqI U. Room S was †he one wi†h †he mirror—luckily on 
†he wall immediately to my right, or I would hove been seized with fear again.

Looking carefully at my map, I realized the singularity of this room. Like the other blind rooms of 
the other tree towers, it should have led to the central heptogonol room. If it didn‘t, the 
entrance to the heptagon would hctve to be in the adjacent blind room, the U. But this room, which 
through one opening led into a room T with a window on the octagon, and through another was 
connected to room S, had the o†her †hree walls full, occupied wi†h cases. Looking around, we 
confirmed wha† was now obvious from the map: for reasons of logic as well as strict symmetry, that 
tower should hove had its heptogonal room, but there was none.

“None,” I said. “There's no such room.”

“No, that's not it. If there were no heptogon, the other rooms would be larger, whereas they are 
more or less the shape of those at the other extremes. The room exists, but cannot be reached.”

“Is it walled up*”



"Probably. And there is the finis Africae, there is the place that lose monks who are now dead were 
hovering about, in their curiosity. It's walled up, but that does not mean there is no access. 
Indeed, there surely is one, and Venantius found it, or was given its description by Adelmo, who 
had it from Berengar. Let's rectd his notes again.”

He took Venantius's paper from his habit and reread it: “The hand over the idol works on the first 
and the seventh of the four.” He looked around. "Why, of course! The ‘idolum’ is the image in the 
mirror!
Venontius was thinking in Greek, and in that tongue, even more than in ours, ‘eidolon’ is image as 
well as 9host,and the mirror reflects our own image, distorted: we ourselves mistook it for a ghost 
the other night! But what, then, can be the four 'supra idolum’* Something over the reflecting 
surface* Then we must place ourselves at a certain angle in order to perceive something reflected 
in the mirror that corresponds to Venantius's description. ”

We tried every position, but with no result. Besides our images, the mirror reflected only hozy 
outlines of the rest of the room, dimly illuminated by the lamp.

"Then,” William medi†o†ed, "by ‘supra idolum’ he could mean beyond †he mirror  which would oblige 
us
to go into the next room, for surely this mirror is a door. ”

The mirror was †aIIer †han q normal man, fixed †o †he wall by a s†urdy oak frqme. We †ouched i† in 
every manner, we tried to thrust our fingers into it, our nails between the frame and the wall, but 
the mirror was as fast as if it were part of the wall, a stone among stones.

“And if not beyond, it could be ‘super idolum,’ ” William murmured, and meanwhile roised his arm, 
stood on tiptoe, qnd ran his hand along the upper edge of the frqme. He found nothing but dust.

"For that matter," William reflected gloomily, “even if beyond it there were a room, the book we 
are seeking and the others sought is no longer in that room, because it was token away, first by 
Venantius and then, God knows where, by Berengar.“
“But perhaps Berengar brought it back here.“
No, that evening we were in the library, and everything suggests he died not long after the theft, 
that sctme night, in the balneary. Otherwise we would have seen him again the next morning. No 
mcttter ...
For the present we have established where the finis Africae is and we have almost all the necessary 
information for perfecting our map of the library. You must admit that many of the labyrinth's 
mysteries hove now been clarified.”

We went through other rooms, recording all our discoveries on my map. We came upon rooms devoted 
solely to writings on mathematics and astronomy, others with works in Aramaic characters which 
neither of us knew, others in even less recognizable characters, perhaps texts from India. We moved 
between two overlapping sequences that soid IUDAEA and AEGYPTUS. In short, not to bore the reader 
with the chronicle of our deciphering, when we later perfected the map definitively we were 
convinced that the library was truly laid out and arranged according to the image of the 
terraqueous orb. To the north we found ANGLIA and GERMANY, which along the west wall were connected 
by


GALLIA, which turned then, at the extreme west, into HIBERNIA, and toward the south wall ROMA 
(paradise of Latin classics!) and YSPANIA. Then to the south came the LEONES and AEGYPTUS, which to 
the east became IUDAEA and FONS ADAE. Between east and north, along the wall, ACAIA, a good 
synecdoche, as William expressed it, to indicate Greece, and in those four rooms there was, 
finally, q grea† hoctrd of poe†s and philosophers of pctgan an†iqui†y.

The system of words was eccentric. At times it proceeded in a single direction, at other times it 
went backward, at still others in a circle; often, as I said before, the same letter served to 
compose two different words (and in these instances the room had one case devoted to one subject 
and one to another). But obviously there was no point looking for a golden rule in this 
arran9ement.It was purely a mnemonic device to allow the librarian to find a given work. To say of 
a book †ha† i† was found in “quarta Acaiae” meant thot it was in the fourth room counting from the 
one in which the initial A appeared, and †hen, †o identify i†, presumably †he librarian knew by 
hear† †he rou†e, circular or straight, that he should follow, as ACAIA was distributed over four 
rooms arran9ed in a square. So we promptly learned the game of the blank walls. For example, 
approaching ACAIA from the east, you found none of the rooms led to the following rooms: the 
labyrinth at this point ended, and to reach the north tower you had to pqss through the other 
three. But nctturctlly the librarians entered from the FONS, knowing perfectly well that to go, let 
us say, into ANGLIA, they had to pass through AEGYPTUS, YSPANIA, GALLIA, and GERMANI.


With these and other fine discoveries our fruitful exploration in the library ended. But before 
saying that we prepared, contentedly, to leave it (only to be involved in other events I will 
narrate shortly), I must moke a confession to my reader. I soid that our exploration was 
undertaken, originally, to seek the key to the mysterious place but thqt, ns we lingered ctlong the 
wcty in the rooms we were marking down by subjec† and arrangemen†, we leafed through books of 
various kinds, as if we were exploring a mysterious continent or a terra incognita. And usually 
this second exploration proceeded by common accord, as William and I browsed through the same 
books, I pointing out the most curious ones to him, and he explaining to me many things I was 
unable to understand.
But at a certain point, and just as we were moving around the rooms of the south tower, known as 
LEONES, my master happened to stop in a room rich in Arabic works with odd optical drawings; and 
since we were that evening provided not with one but with two lamps, I moved, in my curiosity, into 
the next room, realizing that the wisdom and the prudence of the library‘s planning had assembled 
alon9 one of its walls books that certainly could not be handed out to anyone to read, because they 
dealt in various ways with diseases of body and spirit and were almost always written by infidel 
scholars. And my eye fell on a book, not large but adorned with miniatures far removed (luckily!) 
from the subject: flowers, vines, animals in pairs, some medicinal herbs. The title was Speculum 
amoris, by Maximus of Bologna, and it included quotations from many other works, all on the malady 
of love. As the reader will understand, it did not require much once more to inflame my mind, which 
had been numb since morning, and to excite it again with the girl's image.

All thot day I had driven myself to dispel my morning thoughts, repeating thot they were not those 
of a sober, balanced novice, and moreover, since the day's events had been sufficiently rich and 
intense to distract me, my appetites had been dormant, so that I thought I had freed myself by now 
from


what had been but a passing restlessness. Instead, I had only to see that book and I wqs forced to 
soy, “De †e fabula narra†ur,” and I discovered I was more sick wi†h love †hon I had believed. I 
learned later that, reading books of medicine, you are always convinced you feel the pains of which 
they speak. So it was that the mere reading of those pages, glanced at hastily in fear that William 
would enter the room and ask me what I was so diligently investigating, caused me to believe thqt I 
was suffering from thot very disease, whose symptoms were so splendidly described that if, on the 
one hand, I was distressed to discover I was sick (and on the infallible evidence of so many 
auctoritates), on the other I rejoiced to see my own situation depicted so vividly, convincing 
myself that even if I was ill, my illness was, so to speak, normal, inosmuch os countless others 
had suffered in the some way, and the quoted authors might have taken me personally as the model 
for their descriptions.

So I was moved by the pages of Ibn-Hazm, who defines love as a rebel illness whose treatment lies 
within itself, for the sick person does not want to be healed and he who is ill with it is 
reluctant to get well (and God knows this was true!). I realized why, that morning, I had been so 
stirred by everything I saw: it seems thot love enters through the eyes, as Bosil of Ancira olso 
says, and—unmistakable symptom—he who is seized by such on illness displays an excessive gaiety, 
while he wishes at the some time to keep to himself and seeks solitude (as I hqd done that 
morning), while other phenomena affecting him are a violent restlessness and an awe that makes him 
speechless... I was frightened to read that the sincere lover, when denied the sight of the beloved 
object, must fall into a wasting s†a†e †ha† of†en reaches †he poin† of confining him †o bed, and 
sometimes †he malady overpowers †he brain, and the subject loses his mind and raves (obviously I 
had not yet reached that phase, because I hod been quite alert in the exploration of the library). 
gut I read with apprehension that if the illness worsens, death can ensue, and I asked myself 
whether the joy I derived from thinking of the girl was worth this supreme sacrifice of the body, 
apart from all due consideration of the soul's health.

I lectrned, further, from some words of Sctint Hildegard, that the melancholy humor I had felt 
during the day, which I attributed to a sweet feeling of poin at the girl's absence, was perilously 
close to the feeling experienced by one who strays from the harmonious and perfect state man 
experiences in paradise, and this “nigro et omora” melancholy is produced by the breath of the 
serpent and the influence of the Devil. An idea shared also by infidels of equal wisdom, for my 
eyes fell on the lines a††ribu†ed †o Abu-Bakr Muhammad ibn-Zakariyya ar-Razi, who in a Liber 
con†inens identifies amorous melancholy with lycanthropy, which drives its victim to behave like a 
wolf. His description clutched at my throat: first the lovers seem changed in the external 
appearance, their eyesight weakens, their eyes become hollow and without tears, their tongue slowly 
dries up and pustules appear on it, the whole body is parched and they suffer constant thirst; at 
this point they spend the day lying face down, and on the face and the tibias marks like dog bites 
appear, and finally the victims roam through the cemeteries at night like wolves.

Finally, I hctd no more doubts as to the gravity of my situation when I read quotations from the 
great Avicenna, who defined love as an assiduous thought of a melancholy nature, born as a result 
of one's thinking again and again of the features, gestures, or behavior of a person of the 
opposite sex (with what vivid fidelity had Avicenna described my case!): it does not originate as 
an illness but is transformed into illness when, remaining unsatisfied, it becomes obsessive 
thought (and why did I feel so obsessed, I who, God forgive me, had been well satisfied* Or was 
perhaps wha† had happened the previous night not satisfaction of love* But how is this illness 
satisfied, then*), and so there is an incessant flutter of the eyelids, irregular respiration; now 
the victim laughs, now weeps, and the pulse


throbs (and indeed mine throbbed, and my breathing stopped as I read those lines!). Avicenna 
advised an infallible me†hod already proposed by Galen for discovering whether someone is in love: 
grasp †he wrist of the sufferer and utter many names of members of the opposite sex, until you 
discover which name makes the pulse accelerate. I was afraid my master would enter abruptly, seize 
my arm, and observe in the throbbing of my veins my secret, of which I would have been greatly 
ashamed.  Alas,
as remedy Avicenna suggested uniting the two lovers in matrimony, which would cure the illness. 
Truly he was an infidel, though a shrewd one, because he did not consider the condition of the 
Benedictine novice, thus condemned never to recover—or, rather, consecrated, through his own choice 
or the wise choice of his relatives, never to fall ill. Luckily Avicenna, though not thinking of 
the Clunioc order, did consider the case of lovers who cannot be joined, and advised as radical 
treatment hot baths. (Was Berengar trying to be healed of his lovesickness for the dead Adelmo* But 
could one suffer lovesickness for a being of one's own sex, or was that only bestial lust* And was 
the night I had spent perhops not bestial and lustful* No, of course not, I told myself at once, it 
was most sweet—and then immediately added: No, you are wrong, Adso, it was an illusion of the 
Devil, it was most bestial, and if you sinned in being a beast you sin all the more now in refusing 
to ocknowledge it!) But then I read, again in Avicenna, that there were also other remedies: for 
example, enlisting the help of old and expert women who would spend their time denigrating the 
beloved—and it seems thqt old women qre more expert thon men in this task. Perhaps this was the 
solution, but I could not find any old women at the abbey (or young ones, actually), and so I would 
have to ask some monk to speak ill to me of the girl, bu† who* And besides, could a monk know women 
as well as an old gossip would know †hem* The las† solution suggested by the Saracen was truly 
immodest, for it required, the unhappy lover to couple with many slave girls, a remedy quite 
unsuitable for a monk. And so, I asked myself finolly, how con a young monk be healed of love* Is 
there truly no salvation for him* Should I perhaps turn to Severinus and his herbs* I did find a 
passage in Arnold of Villanova, an author I had heard William mention with great esteem, who had it 
that lovesickness was born from on excess of humors ond pneuma, when the human organism finds 
itself in an excess of dampness and heat, because the blood (which produces the generotive seed), 
increasing through excess, produces excess of seed, a "complexio venerea," and an intense desire 
for union in man and woman. There is an estimative virtue situated in the dorsal part of the median 
ventricle of the encephalus (What is that* I wondered) whose purpose is to perceive the insensitive 
intentions perceived by the senses, and when desire for the object perceived by the senses becomes 
†oo s†rong, †he es†imo†ive faculty is upse†, and i† feeds only on †he phantom of †he beloved 
person; then there is an inflammation of the whole soul and body, as sadness alternates with joy, 
because heat (which in moments of despair descends into the deepest parts of the body and chills 
the skin) in moments of joy rises to the surface, inflaming the face. The treatment suggested by 
Arnold consisted in trying to lose the assurance and the hope of reaching the beloved object, so 
that the thought would go away.

Why, in that case I am cured, or nearly cured, I said to myself, because I have little or no hope, 
of seeing the object of my thoughts ctgain, and if I sctw it, no hope of gaining it, and if I 
gained it, none of possessing i† ogain, and if I possessed i†, of keeping i† near me, because of 
bo†h my monkish s†a†e and the duties imposed on me by my family‘s station.  I am saved, I said to 
myself, and I closed the book
and collected myself, just as William entered the room.

NIGHT


In which Salvcttore allows himself to be discovered wretchedly by Bernard Gui, the girl loved by 
Adso is arrested as a witch, and all go to bed more unhappy and worried than before.

We were coming back down into the refectory when we heard some loud noises and saw some faint 
flashes of ligh† from †he direction of †he kitchen. William promptly blew ou† his lqmp. Clinging †o 
†he walls, we approached the door to the kitchen; we realized the sound came from outside, but the 
door was open. Then the voices and lights moved away, and someone slammed the door violently. There 
was a great tumult, which heralded something unpleasant. Swiftly we went back through the ossarium, 
re- emerged in the now deserted church, went out by the south door, and glimpsed a flickering of 
torches in the cloister.

We approached, and in the confusion we must have rushed outside like the many others already on the 
spot, who had come from either the dormitory or the pilgrims' hospice. We saw archers firmly 
9raspingSalvatore, white as the white of his eyes, and a woman, who was crying. My heart 
contracted: it was she, the girl of my thoughts. As she saw me, she recognized me and cast me a 
desperate, imploring look. My impulse was to rush and free her, but William restrained me, 
whispering some far- from-affectionate reproaches. Monks and guests were now rushing in from ctll 
sides.

The abbot arrived, as did Bernard Gui, to whom the captain of the archers made a brief report. This 
is what had happened.

By †he inquisitor’s order, †hey patrolled †he whole compound a† nigh†, poying special o††en†ion †o 
†he path that went from the main gate to the church, the gardens, and the facade of the Aedificium. 
(Why* I wondered. Then I understood: obviously because Bernard had heard from servants or from the 
cooks rumors about nocturnal movement between the outer walls and the kitchen, perhaps without 
learning exactly who wqs responsible; and perhaps the foolish Sqlvatore, qs he had divulged his 
in†en†ions †o me, had already spoken in †he kitchen or †he boms †o some wre†ch who, in†imida†ed by 
questioning that afternoon, had thrown this rumor as a sop to Bernard.) Moving cautiously and in 
darkness through the fog, the archers had finally caught Salvatore in the woman's company, as he 
wos fiddling wi†h †he kitchen door.

“A woman in this holy place! And with a monk!“ Bernard said sternly, addressing the abbot. “Most 
magnificen† lord,” he con†inued, "if i† involved only a violation of †he vow of chas†i†y, †his 
man's punishment would be a matter for your jurisdiction. But since we are not yet sure that the
traffickings of these two wretches hasn‘t somethin9to do with the well-bein9of all the guests, we 
must first cast light on this mystery. Now, you rogue there!" And from Salvatore's bosom he seized 
the obvious bundle the poor man was trying to hide. "What‘s this you have here*”

I already knew: a knife: ct block cat, which, once the bundle was unwrapped, fled with a furious 
yowl; and †wo eggs, now broken and slimy, which †o everyone else looked like blood, or yellow bile, 
or some such foul substance. Salvatore was about to enter the kitchen, kill the cat, cut out its 
eyes: and who knows what promises he had used to induce the girl to follow him. I soon learned what 
promises. The archers searched the girl, with sly laughter and lascivious words, and they found on 
her a little dead booster, still to be plucked. III-luck would have it that in the night, when all 
cats are gray, the cock seemed black, like the cat. I was thinking, however, that it took very 
little to lure her, poor hungry creature, who †he nigh† before had abandoned (and for love of me!) 
her precious ox hear†.



“Aha!” Bernard cried, in a tone of greo† concern. “Black ca† and cock ... Ah, I know such 
paraphernalia.
...” He noticed William among those present. “Do you not also recognize them, Brother William* Were 
you not inquisitor in Kilkenny three years ago, where that girl had intercourse with a devil who 
appeared †o her in †he form of a black cq†*”
To me it seemed my master remained silent out of cowardice. I tugged at his sleeve, shook him, 
whispered to him in despair, “Tell him, tell him it was to eat. ”

He freed himself from my grip and spoke politely to Bernard: “I do not believe you need my past 
experiences to arrive at your conclusions,” he soid.

“Oh, no, there are far more authoritative witnesses.” Bernard smiled. “Stephen of Bourbon, in his 
treatise on the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit, tells how Saint Dominic, after preaching at 
Fanjeaux against the heretics, announced to certain women that they would see the master they had 
served till then. And suddenly into their midst sprang a frightful cat the size of a large dog, 
with huge blazing eyes, a bloody tongue that came to its navel, a short tctil straight in the air 
so that however the ctnimal turned it displayed the evil of its behind, more fetid than any other, 
as is proper for that onus which many devotees of Satan, not least the Knights Templar, have always 
been accustomed to kiss in the course of their meetings. And after moving about the women for an 
hour, the cat sprang on the bell rope and climbed up it, leaving his stinking waste behind. And is 
not the cat the animal beloved by the Co†horis†s, who according †o Alanus de Insulin are so called 
from ‘ca†us,’ because of †his beas† whose posterior they kiss, considering it the incarnation of 
Lucifer* And is this disgusting practice not confirmed also by William of La Verna in the De 
legibus* And does Albertus Magnus not say that cats are potential devils* And does not my venerable 
brother Jacques Fournier recall that on the deathbed of the inquisitor Geoffrey of Cctrcassonne two 
blqck cats ctppectred, who were no other than devils come to taunt those remains*”
A horrified murmur ran through the group of monks, many of whom made the sign of the holy cross.
“My lord abbo†, my lord abbo†,” Bernard was saying meanwhile, with a virtuous mien, “perhaps Your 
Magnificence does not know what sinners are accustomed to do with these instruments! But I know 
well, God help me! I have seen most wicked men, in the darkest hours of the night, along with 
others of their stripe, use black cots to achieve wonders thot they could never deny: to straddle 
certain animals and travel immense spaces under cover of ni9ht, dra9gingtheir slaves, transformed 
into
lustful incubi.  And the Devil shows himself to them, or at least so they strongly believe, in the 
form
of a cock, or some other black animal, and with him—do not ask me how—they even lie together. And I 
know for certain that not long ago, in Avignon itself, with necromoncies of this sort philters and 
ointments were prepared to-mctke attempts on the life of our lord Pope himself, poisoning his 
foods. The Pope was able to defend himself and identify the toxin only because he was supplied with 
prodigious jewels in the form of serpents' tongues, fortified by wondrous emeralds and rubies that 
tough divine power were able to reveal the presence of poison in the foods. The King of France had 
given him eleven of these most precious tongues, thank heaven, and only thus could our lord Pope 
elude death! True, the Pontiffs enemies went still further, and everyone knows what was learned 
about the heretic Bernard Délicieux, arrested ten years ago: books of black magic were found in his 
house, with notes written on the most wicked pages, containing all the instructions for making wax 
figures in order


to harm enemies. And would you believe it* In his house were also found figures thqt reproduced, 
with truly admirable craft, the image of the Pope, with little red circles on the vital ports of 
the body. And everyone knows that such a figure, hung up by a string, is placed before a mirror, 
and then the vital parts are pierced with a pin, and ... Oh, but why do I dwell on these vile, 
disgusting practices* The Pope himself spoke of them and described and condemned them, just lqst 
yeqr, in his constitution Super illius speculo! And I †ruIy hope you have a copy in †his rich 
library of yours, where i† con be properly meditated on.  “
“We have it, we have it,” the abbot eagerly confirmed, in great distress.

"Very well,” Bernard concluded. "Now the case seems clear to me. A monk seduced, a witch, and some 
ritual, which fortunately did not take place. To what end* That is what we will learn, and I am 
ready to socrifice a few hours' sleep to learn it. Will Your Magnificence put at my disposal a 
place where this man can be confined*"

“We have some cells in †he basemen† of †he smi†hy,” †he obbo† soid, “which for†una†ely are very 
rarely used and have stood empty for years. “

“Fortunately or unfortunately,” Bernard remarked. And he ordered the archers to have someone show 
them the way and to take the two prisoners to separate cells; and the men were to tie the monk well
†o some rings se† in †he wall, so †ha† Bernard could go down shortly and, questioning him, look him 
in the face. As for the girl, he odded, it was clear who she was, and it was not worth questioning 
her that night. Other trials awaited her before she would be burned as a witch. And if witch she 
were, she would not speak easily. But the monk might still repent, perhaps (and he glared at the 
trembling Salvatore, as if to moke him understand he was being offered a last chance), telling the 
truth and, Bernard added, denouncing his accomplices.

The two were dragged off, one silent and destroyed, almost feverish, the other weeping and kicking 
and screaming like an animal being led to the shambles. But neither Bernard nor the archers nor I 
myself could understand whctt she wqs sctying in her peasant tongue. For all her shouting, she wets 
as if mute. There are words that give power, others that make us all the more derelict, and to this 
latter category belong the vulgar words of the simple, to whom the Lord has not granted the boon of 
self- expression in the universal tongue of knowledge and power.
Once again I was tempted to follow her; once again William, grim, restrained me. "Be still, fool," 
he said. "The girl is lost; she is burnt flesh.”

As I observed the scene with terror, staring at the girl in a swarm of controdictory thoughts, I 
felt someone touch my shoulder. I don't know why, but even before I turned I recognized the touch 
of Ubertino.

"You are looking at the witch, are you not*” he asked me. And I knew he could not know of my story, 
and therefore he was saying this only because he had caught, with his terrible penetration of human 
possions, †he in†ensi†y of my goze.


“No,” I defended myself, “I qm not Iookin9•t her ... or, rqther, perhaps I am looking at her, but 
she isn't a witch. ... We don't know: perhaps she is innocent. ”

“And you look at her because she is beautiful. She is beautiful, is she not*” he asked me with 
extrctordinary warmth, pressing my arm. “If you look at her because she is beautiful, and you are 
upset by her (but I know you are upset, because the sin of which she is suspected makes her all the 
more fascinating to you), if you look at her and feel desire, that alone makes her a witch. Be on 
guard, my son.  The beauty of the body stops at the skin. If men could see what is beneath the 
skin, as with
the lynx of Boeotio, they would shudder at the sight of a woman. All thot grace consists of mucus 
and blood, humors and bile. If you think of what is hidden in the nostrils, in the throat, and in 
the belly, you will find only filth. And if it revolts you to touch mucus or dung with your 
fingertip, how could we desire to embrace the sack that contains that dung.”

An access of vomiting seized me. I didn't want to hear any more. My master, who had also heard, 
came to my rescue. He brusquely approoched Ubertino, grasped his arm, and freed it from mine.
“Thctt will do, Ubertino,” he said. “That girl will soon be under torture, then on the pyre. She 
will become exactly as you soy, mucus, blood, humors, and bile. Bu† i† will be men like us who dig 
from beneath her skin that which the Lord wanted to be protected and adorned by that skin. And when 
it comes †o prime ma††er, you are no be††er †han she. Leave †he boy alone.”

Ubertino was upset. “Perhops I have sinned,” he murmured. “I have surely sinned. What else can o 
sinner do*”

Now everyone was going back inside, commenting on the even†. William remained a little while with 
Michctel and †he o†her Minorites, who were asking him his impressions.

“Bernard now has an argumen†, ambiguous †hough i† be. In †he abbey †here are necromancers 
circulating who do the same things that were done against the Pope in Avignon. It is not, 
certainly, proof, and, in the first ploce, it cqnnot be used to disturb tomorrow's meeting. Tonight 
he will try to wring from thot poor wretch some other clue, which, I‘m sure, Bernard will not use 
immediately tomorrow morning. He will keep it in reserve: it will be of use later, to upset the 
progress of the discussions if they should ever take a direction unpleasing to him.”
“Could he force the monk to say somethin9to be used agctinst us*” Michael of Cesena asked.
William was dubious. “Let's hope not,” he said. I realized that, if Salvatore told Bernard what he 
had told us, about his own past and the cellarer‘s, and if he hinted at something obout their 
relationship with Ubertino, fleeting though it may have been, a highly embarrassing situation would 
be created.

“In any case, let's wait and see what happens,” William said with serenity. “For that matter, 
Michael, everything was already decided beforehand. But you want to try.”
“I do,” Michael said, “and the Lord will help me. May Saint Francis intercede for all of us.” 
“Amen,” all replied.



“But that is not necessarily possible,” was William's irreverent comment. “Saint Francis could be 
off somewhere waiting for judgment day, without seeing the Lord face to face.”

“A curse on that heretic John!” I heard Master Jerome mutter, as ectch went back to bed. “If he now 
robs us of the saints' help, what will become of us, poor sinners that we are*”

FIFTH DAY
PRIME
In which there occurs a fraternal debate regarding the poverty of Jesus.

My heart rocked by a thousand anxieties after the scene of the night, I woke on the morning of the 
fifth day when prime was already ringing, as William shook me roughly, warning me that the two 
Iegct†ions would be meeting shortly. I looked ou† of †he cell window and sctw nothing. The fog of 
†he previous day was now a milky blanke† †ha† totally covered the high plain.

When I went outside, I saw the abbey as I had never seen it before. A few of the major buildings— 
the church, the Aedificium„ the chapter house—could be discerned even at a distance, though still 
vogue, shodows among shodows, while †he res† of †he cons†ruc†ions were visible only a† o few poces. 
Shapes, of things and animals, seemed to rise suddenly from the void; people materialized from the 
mist, first gray, like ghosts, then gradually though not easily recognizable.

Born in a northern clime, I was not unfamiliar with that element, which qt another moment would 
have pleasantly reminded me of the plains and the castle of my birth. But thot morning the 
condition of the air seemed painfully kin to the condition of my soul, and the sadness with which I 
had awakened increased as I slowly approached the chapter house.

A few feet from the building, I saw Bernard Gui taking his leave of onother person, whom I did not 
immediately recognize. Then, as he passed me, I realized it was Malachi. He looked around like a 
man not wishing to be seen while committing some crime.

He did not recognize me and went off. Impelled by curiosity, I followed Bernard and saw thqt he was 
glancing through some papers, which perhaps Malachi had delivered to him. At the door of the 
chapter house, with a gesture, he summoned the captain of the archers, standing nearby, and 
murmured a few words to him. Then he went in. I followed him still.
It was the first time I had set foot in thot place. On the outside it was of modest dimensions and 
sober design; I realized that it had recently been rebuilt over the remains of a primitive abbatial 
church, perhaps partly destroyed by fire.

Entering from the outside, you passed beneath a portal in the new fashion, with a pointed arch and 
no decorations, surmounted by a rose window. But inside you found yourself in a vestibule, built on 
the


traces of an old narthex. Focin9yoU was ctnother doorway, its arch in the old style, and with a 
half- moon tympanum wondrously carved. It must have been the doorway of the now vanished church.

The sculptures of the tympanum were equally beautiful but not so disturbing as those of the newer 
church. Here qgain, the tympânum was dominated by an enthroned Christ; but at his sides, in various 
poses and wi†h various objects in †heir hands, were †he †weIve apostles, who had received from him 
the mission to go forth and preach among all peoples. Over Christ‘s head, in an arc divided into 
twelve panels, and under Christ's feet, in an unbroken procession of figures, the peoples of the 
world were portrayed, destined to receive the Word. From their dress I could recognize the Hebrews, 
the Cappadocians, the Arabs, the Indians, the Phrygians, the Byzantines, the Armenians, the 
Scythians, the Romans. But, along with them, in thirty round frames that made an arc above the arc 
of twelve panels, were the inhabitants of the unknown worlds, of whom only the Physiologus and the 
vague reports of travelers speak slightly. Many of them were unfamiliar to me, others I identified. 
For example, brutes with six fingers on each hand; fauns born from the worms that develop between 
the bark and the pulp of trees; sirens with scaly tails who seduce seamen: Ethiops, their bodies 
all black, defending themselves against the fire of the sun by digging underground caverns; 
ass-centaurs, men to the navel and ctsses below; Cyclopes, ectch with a single eye the size of a 
shield: Scylla, with ct girl's head and bosom, a she-wolf's belly, and a dolphin‘s tail: the hairy 
men of India, who live in swamps and on the river Epigmarides; the cynocephali, who cannot say a 
word without barking; sciopods, who run swiftly on their single leg and when they want to take 
shelter from the sun stretch out and hold up
their great foot like an umbrella; astomats from Greece, who have no mouth but breathe through 
their nostrils and live only on air; bearded women of Armenia; Pygmies: blemmyae, born heedless, 
wi†h mouths in their bellies and eyes on their shoulders; the monster women of the Red Sea, twelve 
feet tall, with hair to the ankles, a cow's tail at the base of the spine, and camel's hoofs; and 
those whose soles are reversed, so thot, following them by their footprints, one arrives always at 
the ploce whence they cctme and never where they ctre going; and men with three hectds, others with 
eyes that glectm like lamps, and monsters of the island of Circe, human bodies with heads of the 
most diverse animals

These and other wonders were carved on that doorway. But none of them caused uneasiness because 
they did not signify the evils of this ectrth or the torments of hell but, rctther, bore witness 
that the Word had reached all the known world and was extending to the unknown: thus the doorway 
was a joyous promise of concord, of unity achieved in the word of Christ, splendid oecumen.

A good augury, I soid to myself, for the meeting to take place beyond this threshold, where men who 
hove become one another's enemy through conflicting interpretations of the Gospel will perhaps 
succeed today in settling their disputes. And I reproached myself, that I was a weak sinner to 
bewail my personal problems when such important events for the history of Christianity were about 
to take ploce. I measured the smallness of my sufferings ogoinst the great promise of peace and 
serenity confirmed in the stone of the tympanum. I asked God's forgiveness for my frailty, and I 
crossed the threshold with new serenity.

The moment I entered I saw the members of both legations, complete, facing one another on a series 
of benches arranged in a hemicycle, †he †wo sides separated by a †abIe where †he abbo† and Cardinal 
Bertrand were sitting.


William, whom I followed in order to take notes, placed me omon9 the Minorites, where Michael sat 
with his followers and other Franciscans of the court of Avignon, for the meeting was not meant to 
seem a duel between Italians and French, but a debate between supporters of the Franciscan Rule and 
their critics, all united by sound, Catholic loyalty to the papal court.

With Michael of Cesena were Brother Arnold of Aquitaine, Brother Hugh of Newcastle, and Brother 
William Alnwick, who had taken part in the Perugia chapter, and also the Bishop of Kaffa and 
Berengar Talloni, Bonagra†ia of Bergamo, and o†her Minorites from †he Avignon cour†. On †he 
opposite side sa† Lawrence Decoin, bachelor of Avignon, the Bishop of Padua, and lean d'Anneoux, 
doctor of theology in Paris. Next to Bernard Gui, silent and pensive, there was the Dominican Jean 
de Baune, in Italy called Giovanni Dalbena. Years before, William told me, he had been inquisitor 
at Narbonne, where he had tried mony Beghards; but when he found heresy in a proposition concerning 
the poverty of Christ, Berengar Talloni, reader in the convent of that city, rose against him and 
appealed to the Pope. At that time John was still uncertain about this question, so he summoned 
both men to his court, where they argued without arriving at any conclusion. Thus a short time 
later the Franciscans took their stand, which I have described, at the Perugia chapter. Finally, 
there were still others on the side of the Avignonese, including the Bishop of Alborea.

The session was opened by Abo, who deemed it opportune to sum up recent events. He recalled how in 
the year of our Lord 1322 the general chapter of the Friars Minor, gathered at Perugia under the 
leadership of Michael of Cesena, had established with mqture and diligent deliberation that, to set 
an example of the perfect life, Christ and, following his teaching, the apostles had never owned 
anything in common, whether as property or feud, and this truth was a matter of Catholic faith and 
doctrine, deduced from various passages in the canonical books. Wherefore renunciation of ownership 
of all things was meritorious and holy, and the early fathers of the church militant had followed 
this holy rule. The Council of Vienne in 1312 had qlso subscribed to this truth, and Pope John 
himself, in 1317, in the constitution regarding the condition of the Friars Minor which begins 
“Quorundam exigit,” had referred to the deliberations of that council as devoutly composed, lucid, 
sound, and mature. Whence the Perugion chapter, considering that what the apostolic see had always 
approved as sound doctrine should always be held as accepted, nor should it be strayed from in any 
way, hqd merely confirmed
†ho† council's decision, wi†h †he signature of such masters of sacred theology as Brother William 
of England, Brother Henry of Germany, Brother Arnold of Aquitaine, provincials and ministers, and 
also wi†h †he seal of Brother Nicholas, minister of France; Brother William Bloc, bachelor; †he 
minister general and the four ministers provincial; Brother Thomas of Bologna; Brother Peter of the 
province of Saint Francis: Brother Ferdinand of Castello; qnd Brother Simon of Touraine. However, 
Abo added, the following year the Pope, issued the decretal Ad conditorem canonum, against which 
Brother Bonagratia of Bergamo appealed, considering it contrary to the interests of his order. The 
Pope then took down that decretal from the doors of the church of Avignon where it had been 
exposed, and revised it in several places. But he actually made it harsher, as was proved the fact 
that, cts an immediate consequence, Brother Bonagra†ia was held in prison for a year. Nor could 
there be any doubts as to the Pontiffs severity, because that same year he issued the now very well 
known Cum inter nonnullos, in which the theses of the Perugia chapter were definitively condemned.

Politely interrupting Abo at this point, Cordinal Bertrand spoke up, saying we should recall how, 
to complicate matters and to irritate the Pontiff, in 1324 Louis the Bavarian had intervened with 
the Declaration of Sachsenhausen, in which for no good reason he confirmed the theses of Perugia 
(nor


was it comprehensible, Bertrand remarked, with a thin smile, that the Emperor should acclaim so 
enthusiastically o poverty he did not practice in the least), setting himself agoinst the lord 
Pope, calling him inimicus pacis and saying he was bent on fomenting scandal and discord, and 
finally calling him a heretic, indeed a heresiarch.

"No† exactly,” Abo ventured, †rying †o mediate.

"In substance, yes,” Bertrand said sharply. And he added that it was precisely the Emperor's 
inopportune meddling that had obliged the lord Pope to issue the decretal Quia quorundam, and that 
eventually he had sternly bidden Michael of Cesena to appear before him. Michael had sent letters 
of excuse, declaring himself ill—something no one doubted—and had sent in his stead Brother John 
Fidanzo and Brother Umile Custodio from Perugia. But it so happened, the cardinal went on, that the 
Guelphs of Perugia had informed the Pope that, far from being ill, Brother Michael was in 
communication with Louis of Bavaria. In any case, what was past was past, and now Brother Michael 
looked well and serene, and so was expected in Avignon. However, it was better, the cardinal 
admitted, to consider beforehand, as prudent men from both sides were now doing, what Michael would 
finally scty to the Pope, since everyone's ctim wets still not to exacerbctte but, rqther, to 
settle fraternally ct dispute thot had no reason to exist between a loving father and his devoted 
sons, and which until then had been kept ablaze only by the interference of secular men, whether 
emperors or viceroys, who had nothing †o do wi†h †he questions of Holy Mo†her Church.

Abo †hen spoke up and soid †ha†, †hough he was a man of †he church and abbo† of an order †o which 
the church owed much (a murmur of respect and deference was heard from both sides of the 
hemicycle), he still did not feel the Emperor should remain aloof from such questions, for the many 
reasons that Brother William of Baskerville would expound in due course. But, Abo went on, it was 
nevertheless proper that the first part of the debate should take plqce between the papal envoys 
and the representatives of those sons of Saint Francis who, by their very participation in this 
meeting, showed themselves to be the most devoted sons of the Pope. And then he asked that Brother 
Michael or his nominee indicate the position he meant to uphold in Avignon.

Michael said that, to his great and joyous emotion, there was in their midst that morning Ubertino 
of Casale, from whom the Pope himself, in 1322, had asked for a thorough report on the question of 
poverty. And Ubertino could best sum up, with that lucidity, erudition, and devout faith that all 
recognized in him, the capitol points of those ideas which now, unswervingly, were those of the 
Franciscan order.

Ubertino rose, and as soon as he began to speak, I understood why he had aroused so much 
enthusiasm, both as a preacher and as o courtier. Impassioned in his gesticulation, his voice 
persuasive, his smile fascinating, his reasoning clear and consequential, he held his listeners 
fast for all the time he spoke. He began a very learned disquisition on the reasons that supported 
the Perugia theses. He said that, first of all, it had to be recognized that Christ and the 
apostles were in a double condition, because they were prelates of the church of the New Testament, 
and in this respect they possessed, as regards the authority of dispensation and distribution, to 
give to the poor and to the ministers of the church, as is written in the fourth chapter of the 
Acts of the Apostles, and this point nobody disputes. But secondarily, Christ and the apostles must 
be considered as individual persons, †he base of every religious perfection, and perfec† despisers 
of †he world. And on †his score


two ways of having are posited, one of which is civil qnd worldly, which the imperial laws define 
with the words "in bonis nostris,” becouse we call ours those goods of which we have the defense 
and which, if taken from us, we have the right to claim. Whereby it is one thing to defend in a 
civil and worldly sense one's own possession against him who would take it, appealing to the 
imperial judge (to affirm that Christ and the apostles owned things in this sense is heretical, 
because, as Mcttthew says in chapter 5, if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy 
coat, let him have thy cloak also: nor does Luke say any differently in chapter 6, where Christ 
dismisses from himself all power and lordship and imposes the same on his apostles; and consider 
further Matthew chapter 19, in which Peter says to the Lord thot to follow him they have left 
everything); but in the other way temporal things can yet be held, for †he purpose of common 
fraternal charity, and in †his way Chris† and his disciples possessed some goods by natural right, 
which right by some is called ius poli, that is to say the law of heaven, to sustain nature, which 
without human intervention is consonant with proper reason, whereas ius fori is power that derives 
from humon covenant. Before the first division of things, as for as ownership was concerned, they 
were like those thin9• today which are not among anyone's possessions and are granted to him who 
takes them; things were in a certain sense common to all men, whereas it was only after original 
sin thot our progenitors began to divide up ownership of things, and thus began worldly dominion as 
we now know it. But Christ and the apostles held things in the first way, ctnd so they had clothing 
and the bread and fishes, and as Paul says in I Timothy: Having food and roimen† ie† us be 
therewith content. Wherefore Christ and his disciples did not hold these things in possession but 
in use, their absolute poverty remaining intact. Which had already been recognized by Pope Nicholas 
II in †he decre†qI Exii† qui semina†.
But on the opposite side Jean d'Anneaux rose to say that Ubertino's positions seemed to him 
contrary both to proper reason and to the proper interpretation of Scripture. Whereas with goods 
perishable with use, such as bread and foods, a simple right of use cannot be considered, nor can 
de-facto use be posited, but only abuse; everything the believers held in common in the primitive 
church, as is deduced from Acts 2 and 3, they held on the basis of the same type of ownership they 
had had before their conversion: the apostles, after the descent of the Holy Spirit, possessed 
farms in Judaea: the vow of living without property does not extend to what mon needs in order to 
live, and when Peter said he had left everything he did not mectn he hctd renounced property; Adam 
hqd ownership and property of things; the servant who receives money from his master certainly does 
not just make use or abuse of it; the words of the Exiit qui seminal to which the Minorites are 
always referring and which establish that the Friars Minor have only the use of what serves them, 
without having control and ownership„ mus† be referring only †o goods †ho† ore no† consumed wi†h 
use; and in foe† if †he Exii† included perishable goods it would sustain the impossible: de-facto 
use cannot be distinguished from juridical control; every human right, on the basis of which 
material goods are owned, is contained in the laws of kings; Christ as a mortal man, from the 
moment of his conception, was owner of all earthly goods, and as God he received from the Father 
universal control over everything: he was owner of clothing, food, money for tribute, and offerings 
of the faithful; and if he was poor, it was not because he hctd no property, but because he did not 
receive its fruits; for simple juridical control, separated from the collection of interest, does 
not enrich the possessor; and finally, even if the Exiit had said otherwise, the Roman Pontiff, in 
everything concerning faith and morals, can revoke the decisions of his predecessors and can even 
make contrary assertions.

It was at this point that Brother Jerome, Bishop of Kaffa, rose vehemently, his beard shaking with 
wrath even though he tried to make his words sound conciliatory. He began an argumentation that to


me seemed fqirly confused. “What I will sqy to the Holy Father, and myself who will say it, I 
submit to his correction, becouse I †ruly believe John is †he vicar of Chris†, and for †his 
confession I was seized by the Saracens. And I will refer first to an event recorded by a great 
doctor, in the dispute that arose one day among monks as to who was the father of Melchizedek. Then 
the abbot Copes, questioned about this, shook his heqd and declctred: Woe to you, Copes, for you 
seek only those things thot God does not command you to seek and neglect those He does command. 
There, as is readily deduced from my example, it is so clear that Christ and the Blessed Virgin and 
the apostles held nothing, individually or in common, †ha† i† would be less clear †o recognize †ha† 
Jesus was man and God at the same time, and yet it seems clear to me thot anyone denying the 
evidence of the former must then deny the latter!"

He spoke triumphantly, and I saw William raise his eyes to heaven. I suspect he considered Jerome's 
syllogism quite defective, and I cannot say he was wrong, but even more defective, it seemed to me, 
was the infuriated and contrary argumentation of Jean de Baune, who said that he who affirms 
something about the poverty of Christ affirms what is seen (or not seen) with the eye, whereas to 
define his simultaneous humanity and divinity, foith intervenes, so that the two propositions 
cannot be compared.

In reply, Jerome was more acute than his opponent: “Oh, no, dear brother," he said, “I think 
exactly the opposite is true, because all the Gospels declare Christ was a man and ate and drank, 
and as his most evident miracles demonstrate, he was also God, and all this is immediately 
obvious!”
“Magicians and soothsayers also work miracles,“ de Baune said smugly.

"True,” Jerome replied, "but through magic art. Would you compare Christ's miracles to magic art*” 
The assembly murmured indignantly thqt they would not consider such a thing. "And finally,” Jerome 
went on, feeling he was now close to victory, "would his lordship the Cardinal del Poggetto want to 
consider heretical the belief in Christ‘s poverty, when this proposition is the basis of the Rule 
of an order such as the Franciscan, whose sons have gone to every realm to preach and shed their 
blood, from Morocco †o Indiq*“
“Holy spirit of Peter of Spain,“ William muttered, "protect us."

"Mos† beloved brother,” de Boune †hen cried, †oking a s†ep forward, “speok if you will of †he blood 
of your monks, but do not forget, that same tribute has also been paid by religious of other 
orders. ”

"With all due respect to my lord cardinal,” Jerome shouted, “no Dominican ever died among the 
infidels, whereas in my own time alone, nine Minorites have been martyred!”

The Dominican Bishop of Alborea, red in †he face, now s†ood up. "I can prove †ha† before any 
Minorites were in Tartary, Pope Innocent sent three Dominicans there!“

"He did*" Jerome said, snickering. “Well, I know that the Minorites hove been in Tartary for eighty 
years, and †hey have for†y churches †hroughou† †he country, whereas †he Dominicans have only five 
churches, all along the coast, and perhaps fifteen monks in all. And that settles the question!”


“I† does no† se††Ie any question a† all,” †he Bishop of Alborea shou†ed, “because †hese Minorites, 
who produce heretics as bitches produce puppies, claim everything for themselves, boast of martyrs, 
but have fine churches, sumptuous vestments, and buy and sell like all the other religious!”

“No, my lord, no,” Jerome interrupted, “they do not buy qnd sell on their own, but through the 
procurotors of the apostolic see, and the procurators have possession, while the Minorites have 
only the use!”

“Is that so*” the bishop sneered. “And how mony times, then, hove you sold without procurators* I 
know the story of some farms that—”

“If I did so, I was wrong,” Jerome hastily interrupted, “not to turn that over to the order may 
hove been o weakness on my part!”

“Venerable brothers,” Abo †hen intervened, “our problem is no† whether †he Minorites are poor, bu† 
whether our Lord was poor. ”

“Well, then“—at this point Jerome raised his voice agoin—“on that question I hove an argument that 
cuts like a sword. ”

“Sain† Francis, pro†ec† †hy sons ” William said, wi†hou† much confidence.

“The argument,” Jerome continued, “is that the Orientals and the Greeks, far more familiar than we 
with the doctrine of the holy fathers, are convinced of the poverty of Christ. And if those 
heretics and schismatics so clearly uphold such a clear truth, do we want to be more heretical ond 
schismotical than they, by denying it* These Orientals, if they heard some of our number preaching 
against this truth, would stone them!”

“What are you soying*” the Bishop of Alborea quipped. “Why, then, do they not stone the Dominicons, 
who preach precisely against this*”

“Dominicans* Why, no one has ever seen them down there!”

Alborea, his foce purple, observed thot this monk Jerome had been in Greece perhaps fifteen years, 
whereas he had been there since his boyhood. Jerome replied that the Dominican Alborea might 
perhaps have been in Greece, bu† living a sybari†ic life in fine bishops' aces, whereas he, a 
Franciscan, had been there not fifteen years, but twenty-two, and had preached before the Emperor 
in Constantinople. Then Alborea, running short on arguments, started to cross the space thot 
separated him from †he Minorites, indicating in a loud voice and wi†h words I dare no† repea† his 
firm in†en†ion to pull off the beard of the Bishop of Kaffa, whose masculinity he called into 
question, and whom he planned to punish, by the logic of an eye for an eye, shoving that beard in a 
certain place.

The other Minorites rushed to form a barrier and defend their brother: the Avignonese thought it 
useful to lend the Dominican a hand, and (Lord, have mercy on the best among thy sons!) o brawl 
ensued, which the abbot and the cardinal tried to quell. In the tumult that followed, Minorites and 
Dominicans said grave things to one another, as if each were a Christian fighting the Saracens. The


only ones who remained in their seats were William, on one side, and Bernard Gui, on the other. 
William seemed sad, and Bernard happy, if you can call happiness the faint smile that curled the 
inquisitor's lip.

"Are there no better arguments,” I asked my master, as Alborea tugged at the beard of the Bishop of 
Kaffq, “to prove or refute the poverty of Christ*”

“Why, you can affirm bo†h positions, my good Adso,” William said, “and you will never be able †o 
establish on the basis of the Gospels whether, and to what extent, Christ considered as his 
property the tunic he wore, which he then perhaps threw oway when it was worn out. And, if you 
like, the doctrine of Thomas Aquinas on property is bolder than that of us Minorites. We say: We 
own nothing and have everything in use. He said: Consider yourselves also owners, provided that, if 
anyone lacks what you possess, you grant him its use, and out of obligation, not charity. But the 
question is not whether Christ was poor: it is whether the church must be poor. And ’poor‘ does not 
so much mean owning a palace or not: it means, rather, keeping or renouncing the right to legislate 
on earthly matters.“
"Then this,” I said, "is why the Emperor is so interested in whctt the Minorites scty about 
poverty.”

“Exactly. The Minorites are playing the Emperor's game against the Pope. But Marsilius and I 
consider it a two-sided game, and we would like the empire to support our view and serve our idea 
of human rule.“

“And will you say this when you are called on to speak*”

“If I soy it I fulfill my mission, which was to expound the opinions of the imperial theologians. 
But if I scty i† my mission fails, because I ough† †o be fctciIi†q†ing a second meeting in Avignon, 
and I don’† believe John would agree to my going there to say these things.”

"And so—*"

"And so I am trapped between two opposing forces, like an ass who does not know which of two sacks 
of hay to eat. The time is not ripe. Marsilius raves of an impossible transformation, immediately; 
but Louis is no better than his predecessors, even if for the present he remains the only bulwark 
against a wretch like John. Perhaps I shall hove to speak, unless they end up killing one onother 
first. In any case, Adso, write it all down: let at least some trace remqin of what is happening 
today.“

As we were speaking—and truly I do not know how we managed to hear each other—the dispute reached 
its climax. The archers intervened, at a sign from Bernard Gui, to keep the two factions apart. But 
like besiegers and besieged, on both sides of the walls of a fortress, they hurled insults and 
rebuttals at one another, which I record here at random, unable to attribute them to specific 
speakers, and with the premise that the phrases were not uttered in turn, as would happen in a 
dispute in my country, but in Mediterranean fashion, one overlapping another, like the waves of an 
angry sea.
"The Gospel says Christ had a purse!”


“Shut up! You people paint that purse even on crucifixes! Whqt do you say, then, of the fact that 
our Lord, when he entered Jerusalem, went back every night to Bethony*”
“If our Lord chose to go and sleep in Bethany, who are you to question his decision*”

“No, you old oss, our Lord returned †o Be†hany because he had no money †o pay for an inn in 
Jerusalem!”

“Bonagratia, you‘re the ass here! What did our Lord eat in Jerusalem*”
“Would you soy, then, that a horse who receives oats from his master to keep alive is the owner of 
the oo†s*”
“You see* You compare Christ to a horse. ”
“No, you are the one who compares Christ to a simoniocal prelate of your court, vessel of dung!” 
“Really* And how many lawsuits has the holy see had to undertake to protect your property*” “The 
property of the church, not ours! We had it in use!”
“In use to spend, to build beautiful churches with gold statues, you hypocrites, whited sepulchers, 
sinks of iniquity! You know well that charity, not poverty, is the principle of the perfect life!”
“That is what your glutton Thomas said!”
“Mind your words, villain! The man you call 'glutton' is a saint of the holy Roman church!”
“Saint, my foot! Canonized by John to spite the Franciscans! Your Pope can't create saints, because 
he's q heretic! No, a heresiarch!”

“We‘ve heard that one before! Words spoken by that Bavarian puppet at Sachsenhausen, rehearsed by 
your Ubertino!”
“Mind how you speak, pig, son of the whore of Babylon and other strumpets as well! You know 
Ubertino wasn't with the Emperor that year: he was right there in Avignon, in the service of 
Cardinal Orsini, and the Pope was sending him as a messenger to Aragon!”

“I know, I know, he took his vow of poverty at the cardinal‘s table, as he now lives in the richest 
qbbey of †he peninsula! Ubertino, if you weren‘† †here, who prompted Louis †o use your writings*”

“Is it my fault if Louis reads my writings* Surely he cannot read yours, you illiterate!” “I* 
illiterate* Was your Francis a literate, he who spoke with geese*”
“You blaspheme!”



“You‘re the blasphemer; you know the keg ritual!”
“I have never seen such a thing, and you know it!”

“Yes, you did, you and your Ii††Ie friars, when you slipped in†o †he bed of Clare of Mon†efalco!”

“May God strike you! I was inquisitor at that time, and Clare had already died in the odor of 
sanctity!”
“Clare gave off the odor of sanctity, but you were sniffing another odor when you sang matins to 
the
nuns!”

“Go on, go on, the wrath of God will reoch you, as it will reach your master, who has given welcome 
to two heretics like that Ostrogoth Eckhart and that English necromancer you call Branucerton!”
“Venerable brothers, venerable brothers!” Cardinal Bertrand and the abbot shouted.

TERCE

In which Severinus speaks to William of a strange book, and William speaks to the envoys of a 
strange
concep† of temporal governmen†.

The quarrel was still raging when one of the novices guarding the door came in, passing through 
that confusion like someone walking across a field lashed by hail. He approached William, to 
whisper that Severinus wanted urgently to speqk to him. We went out into the narthex, which was 
crowded with curious monks †rying, through †he shou†s and noise, †o ca†ch something of wha† was 
going on inside. In the first rank we saw Aymaro of Alessandria, who welcomed us with his usual 
condescending sneer of commiseration at the foolishness of the universe. “To be sure, since the 
rise of the mendicant orders Christianity hqs become more virtuous,” he said.

William brushed him aside with a certain roughness and headed for Severinus, awaiting us in a 
corner. He was distressed and wanted to speak to us in private, but it was impossible to find a 
calm spot in thot confusion. We thought to go outside, but Michael of Cesena looked out through the 
doorway of the chapter hall, bidding William to come back in, because, he said, the quarrel was 
being settled and the series of speeches should be resumed.

William, torn between two bags of hay, urged Severinus to speak, and the herbalist did his best to 
keep others from overhearing.
“Berengar certainly came to the infirmary before he went to the balneary,” he said.

“How do you know*” Some monks approached, †heir curiosity aroused by our confabuIa†ion. Severinus's 
voice sank still lower, as he looked around.



“You told me thqt thqt man ... must have had something with him.  Well, I found something in my
laboratory, omong †he o†her books ... a book †ha† is no† mine, a strange book. ”

“That must be it,” William said triumphantly. “Bring it to me at once.”
“I can’†,” Severinus said. “I‘ll explain †o you Io†er. I have discovered  I believe I have 
discovered
something interesting. ... You must come, I have to show you the book ... cautiously. ” He broke 
off.
We realized that, silently as was his custom, Jorge had appeared as if by magic at our side. His 
hands were extended before him, as if, not used to moving in that place, he were trying to sense 
his direction. A normal person would not have been able to comprehend Severinus‘s whispers, but we 
had learned some time before that forge‘s hearing, like that of all blind men, was especially 
sharp.

Still, the old man seemed to have heord nothing. He moved, in fact, in the direction oway from us, 
touched one of the monks, and asked him something. The monk took him gently by the arm and led him 
outside. A† †ha† momen† Michael reappeored, again summoning Williom, and my mos†er made a decision. 
“Please,” he said to Severinus, “go back at once to the place from whence you came. Lock yourself 
inside and wait for me. You“—he sqid to me—"follow Jorge. Even if he did heqr something, I don't 
believe he will have himself led to the infirmary. In any case, you will tell me where he goes.”

As he started to go back into the hall, he noticed (as I also noticed) Aymaro pushing his way 
through the jostling crowd in order to follow Jorge outside. Here William acted unwisely, because 
now in a loud voice, from one end of the narthex to the other, he said to Severinus, who was at the 
outer threshold, “Make sure those papers are safe. ... Don't go back to  where they came from!” 
Just as I was
preparing to follow Jorge, I saw the cellarer leaning against the iamb of the outside door; he had 
heard William's warnings and was looking from my master to the herbalist, his face tense with fear. 
He sctw Severinus going out and followed him. On the threshold, I was qfrctid of losing sight of 
Jorge, who was abou† †o be swallowed up by †he fog, bu† †he o†her †wo, heading in †he opposite 
direction, were also on the verge of vanishing into the brume. I calculated rapidly what I should 
do. I had been ordered to follow the blind man, but because it was feared he was going toward the 
infirmary.
Instead, his guide was tctking him in another direction: he wets crossing the cloister, heading for 
the church or the Aedificium. The cellarer, on the contrary, was surely following the herbalis†, 
and William was worried about what could happen in the laboratory. So I started following the two 
men, wondering, among other things, where Aymaro had gone, unless he had come out for reasons quite 
removed from ours.

Keeping a reasonable distance, I did not lose sight of the cellarer, who was slowing his pace 
because he had realized I was following him. He couldn't be sure the shadow at his heels was mine, 
as I couldn't be sure the shadow whose heels I followed belonged to him: but as I had no doubts 
about him, he had none about me.

Forcing him to keep an eye on me, I prevented him from dogging Severinus too closely. And so when 
the door of the infirmary appeared in the mist it was closed. Severinus had already gone inside, 
heaven be thanked. The cellarer turned once again to look at me„ while I stood motionless as o tree 
of the garden: then he seemed to come to a decision and he moved toward the kitchen. I felt I hod 
fulfilled my mission, so I decided to go back and report. Perhaps I made a mistake: if I had 
remained


on guard, many other misfortunes would hqve been averted. But this I know now; I did not know it 
then.

I went back into the chapter hall. That busybody, it seemed to me, did not represent a great 
danger. I approached William again and briefly gave him my report. He nodded his approval, then 
motioned me to be silent. The confusion was now abating.. The legates on both sides were exchanging 
the kiss of peace. The Bishop of Alborea praised the faith of the Minorites. Jerome exalted the 
charity of the preachers, all expressed the hope of a church no longer racked by internal 
conflicts. Some praised the strength of one group, some the temperonce of onother; all invoked 
justice and counseled prudence.
Never have I seen so many men so sincerely concerned with the triumph of the cardinal and 
theological virtues.

But now Bertrand del Poggetto was inviting William to expound the theses of the imperial 
theologians. William rose, reluctantly: he was realizin9 that the meeting was of no utility, and in 
any case he was in a hurry to leave, for the mysterious book was now more urgent for him, than the 
results of the meeting. But it was clear he could not evade his duty.

He began speaking then, with many “eh's and “oh's, perhaps more than usual and more than proper, as 
if to make it clear he was absolutely unsure about the things he was going to say, and he opened by 
affirming that he understood perfectly the viewpoint of those who had spoken before him, and for 
that matter what others called the "doctrine” of the imperial theologians was no more than some 
sco††ered observations †ha† did no† claim †o be established articles of fai†h.

He said, further, that, given the immense goodness that God had displayed in creating the race of 
His sons, loving them all without distinction, recalling those pages of Genesis in which there was 
yet no mention of priests and kings, considering qlso thqt the Lord hqd given to Adam and to his 
descendants power over the things of this earth, provided they obeyed the divine laws, we might 
infer thot the Lord also was not averse to the idea that in earthly things the people should be 
legislator and effective first cause of the law. By the term “people,” he said, it would be best to 
signify all citizens, but since ctmong citizens children must be included, cts well cts idiots, 
mqlefactors, and women, perhaps i† would be possible †o arrive reasonably a† a definition of †he 
people as †he be††er par† of †he citizens, though he himself at the moment did not consider it 
opportune to assert who actually belonged †o †ha† par†.

He clectred his throat, apologized to his listeners, remctrkin9 that the atmosphere was certainly 
very damp, and suggested †ha† †he way in which †he people could express i†s will migh† be an 
elective general assembly. He said †ha† †o him i† seemed sensible for such an assembly †o be 
empowered †o interpret, change, or suspend the low, because if the low is mode by one mon alone, he 
could do harm through ignorance or malice, and William added that it was unnecessary to remind 
those present of numerous recent instances. I noticed that the listeners, rather puzzled by his 
previous words, could only assent to these last ones, because each was obviously thinking of a 
different person, and each considered very bad the person of whom he was thinking.
Well, then, William continued, if one man con make laws badly, will not many men be better* 
Naturally, he underlined, he was speaking of earthly laws, regarding the management of civil 
things. God had told Adam not to eat of the tree of good and evil, and that was divine law; but 
then He had authorized, or,


rather, encourctged, Adam to give thin9• flames,and on thctt score He had allowed His terrestrictl 
subject free rein. In fact, though some in our times say thot nomina sunt consequentio rerum, the 
book of Genesis is actually quite explicit on this point: God brought all the animals unto Adam to 
see what he would call them: and whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was the name 
thereof. And though surely the first man hqd been clever enough to call, in his Adamic languctge, 
every thing and animal according to its nature, nevertheless he was exercising a kind of sovereign 
right in imagining the name that in his opinion best corresponded to that nature. Because, in fact, 
it is now known †ha† men impose differen† names †o designate concepts, †hough only †he concepts, 
signs of things, ore the same for all. So that surely the word “nomen” comes from “nomos,” that is 
to say “law,” since nomina are given by men ad placitum, in other words by free and collective 
accord.
The listeners did not dare contest this learned demonstration.
Whereby, William concluded, is it clear that legislation over the things of this earth, and 
therefore over the things of the cities and kingdoms, has nothing to do with the custody and 
administration of the divine word, an unalienable privilege of the ecclesiastical hierarchy. 
Unhappy indeed, William said, are the infidels, who hctve no similctr authority to interpret for 
them the divine word (and all felt sorry for the infidels). But does this perhaps entitle us to say 
that the infidels do not have the tendency to make laws and administer their affairs through 
governments, kings, emperors, or sultans, caliphs, or however you chose to call them* And could it 
be denied that many Roman emperors—Trajan, for instance—had exercised their temporal power with 
wisdom* And who gave the pagans and the infidels
†his natural capacity †o legislate and live in political communities* Was i† perhaps †heir false 
divinities, who necessarily do not exist (or do not exist necessarily, however you understand the 
negation of this modality)* Certainly not. It could only have been conferred by the God of hosts, 
the God of Israel, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. ... Wondrous proof of the divine goodness that 
conferred the capacity for judging political things also on those who deny the authority of the 
Romqn Pontiff and do not profess the same sacred, sweet, and terrible mysteries of the Christian 
people! But what finer demonstration than this of the fact that temporal rule and secular 
jurisdiction have nothing to do with
†he church and wi†h †he law of Jesus Chris† and were ordained by God beyond all ecclesiastical 
confirmation and even before our holy religion was founded*
He coughed again, but this time he was not alone. Many of those present were wriggling on their 
benches and clearing their throats. I saw the cardinal run his tongue over his lips and make a 
gesture, anxious but polite, to urge William to get to the point. And William now grappled with 
what seemed to all, even to those who did not share them, the perhaps unplectsant conclusions of 
his incontrovertible reasoning. William said that his deductions seemed to him supported by the 
very example of Christ, who did no† come in†o †his world †o command, bu† †o be subjec† †o †he 
conditions he found in †he world, at least as far as the lows of Caesar were concerned. He did not 
want the apostles to have command and dominion, and therefore it seemed a wise thing that the 
successors of the apostles should be relieved of any worldly or coercive power. If †he pope, †he 
bishops, and †he priests were no† subject to the worldly and coercive power of the prince, the 
authority of the prince would be challenged, and thus, with it, an order would be challenged that, 
as had been demonstrated previously, had been decreed by God. To be sure, some delicate cases must 
be considered—William said—like those of the heretics, on whose heresy only the church, custodian 
of the truth, can pronounce, though only the secular arm can act. When the church identifies some 
heretics she must surely point them ou† †o †he prince, who mus† rightly be informed of †he 
conditions of his citizens. Bu† wha† should †he


prince do with a heretic* Condemn him in the name of that divine truth of which he is not the 
custodian* The prince can and must condemn the heretic if his action harms the community, that is, 
if the heretic, in declaring his heresy, kills or impedes those who do not share it. But at that 
point the power of †he prince ends, because no one on †his ear†h can be forced through †or†ure †o 
follow †he precepts of the Gospel: otherwise what would become of that free will on the exercising 
of which each of us will be judged in the next world* The church can and must worn the heretic that 
he is abandoning the community of the faithful, but she cannot judge him on earth and force him 
against his will. If Christ had wanted his priests to obtain coercive power, he would have laid 
down specific precepts as Moses did in the ancient law. He did not do it; therefore he did not wish 
it. Or does someone want to suggest the idea that he did wish it but lacked the time or the ability 
to say so in
three years of preaching* But it was right that he should not wish it, because if he had wished it, 
then the pope would be able to impose his will on the king, and Christianity would no longer be a 
law of freedom, but one of intolerable slavery.

All this, William added with a cheerful expression, is no limitation of the powers of the supreme 
Pontiff, but, rather, an exaltation of his mission: because the servant of the servants of God is 
on this earth to serve qnd not to be served. And, finally, it would be odd, to sqy the least, if 
the Pope had jurisdiction over the things of the Roman Empire’ but not over the other kingdoms of 
the earth. As everyone knows, what the Pope says on divine questions is as valid for the subjects 
of the King of France as it is for those of the King of England, but it must be valid also for the 
subjects of the Great Khan or the Sultan of the infidels, who are called infidels precisely because 
they are not faithful to this beautiful truth. And so if the Pope were to assume he had temporal 
jurisdiction—as pope—only over †he affairs of †he empire, †ha† migh† justify †he suspicion †ha†, 
identifying temporal jurisdiction with the spiritual, by that same token he would have no spiritual 
jurisdiction over not only the Saracens or the Tartars, but also over the French and the 
English—which would be a criminal blasphemy. And this was the reason, my master concluded, why it 
seemed right to him to suggest that the church of Avignon was injuring all mankind by asserting the 
right to approve or suspend him who had been elected emperor of the Romans. The Pope does not have 
greater rights over the empire than over other kingdoms, and since neither the King of France nor 
the Sultan is subject to the Pope's approval, there seems to be no good reqson why the Emperor of 
the Germans and Italians should be subjec† †o i†. Such subjection is no† a ma††er of divine righ†, 
because Scripture does no† speak of i†. Nor is it sanctioned by the rights of peoples, for the 
reasons already expounded. As for the connection with the dispute about poverty, William added, his 
own humble opinions, developed in the form of conversational suggestions by him and by some others 
such as Marsilius of Padua and John of Jandun, led to the following conclusions. if the Franciscans 
wanted to remain poor, the Pope could not and should not oppose such a virtuous wish. To be sure, 
if the hypothesis of Christ's poverty were to be proved, this would not only help the Minorites but 
also strengthen the idea that Jesus had not wished any earthly jurisdiction. gut that morning he, 
William, had heard very wise people assert that
it could not be proved that Christ had been poor. Whence it seemed to him more fittin9 * reverse 
the
demons†ra†ion. Since nobody had asserted, or could asser†, †ho† Jesus had sough† any earthly 
jurisdiction for himself or for his disciples, this detachment of Jesus from temporal things seemed 
sufficient evidence to suggest the belief, without sinning, that Jesus, on the contrary, preferred 
poverty.

William had spoken in such a meek tone, he had expressed his certainties in such a hesitant way, 
that none of †hose presen† was able †o s†and up, and rebu†. This does no† mean †ha† all were 
convinced of


what he had said. The Avi9noFlese were now writhing, frowning, and mutterin9Commentsamong 
themselves, and even the obbo† seemed unfavorably impressed by those words, as if he were thinking 
this was not the relationship he had desired between his order and the empire. And as for the 
Minorites, Michael of Cesena was puzzled, Jerome aghast, Ubertino pensive.

The silence was broken by Cardinol del Pogge††o, s†iII smiling ond reloxed os he politely asked 
William whether he would go to Avignon to say these same thins to the lord Pope. William asked the 
opinion of the cardinal, who said that the Pope had heard many debatable opinions uttered during 
his life and was a most loving father toward oil his sons, but surely these propositions would 
grieve him very much.

Bernard Gui, who until then had not opened his mouth, now spoke up: “I would be very happy if 
Brother William, so skilled and eloquent in expounding his own ideas, were to submit them to the 
judgment of the Pontiff. ”

“You have convinced me, my lord Bernard,” William said. “I will not come.” Then, oddressing the 
cardinal, in on apologetic tone: “You know, this fluxion that is affecting my chest dissuades me 
from undertaking such a long journey in this season. ”
“Then why did you speak at such length*” the cardinal asked.

“To bear witness to the truth,” William said humbly. “The truth shall make us free.”

“Ah, no!” Jean de Baune exploded at this point. “Here we are not talking about the truth that makes 
us free, but about excessive freedom that wants to set itself up as truth!”

“Thct† is also possible,” William admi††ed sweetly.

My intuition suddenly warned me that another tempest of hearts and tongues was about to burst, far 
more furious than, the earlier one. But nothing happened. While de Baune was still speaking, the 
captain of the archers entered and went to whisper something into Bernard's eqr. Bernard rose 
abruptly and held up his hand to speak.

“Brothers,” he said, “it is possible this profitable discussion may be resumed, but for the moment 
an event of tremendous gravity obliges us to suspend our session, with the abbot‘s permission. 
Something has happened there.  ” He pointed vaguely outside, then strode through the hall and went 
out. Many
followed him, William among the first, and I with him.
My master looked at me and said, “I fear something has happened to Severinus.”

SEXT
In which Severinus is found murdered but the book that he had found is to be found no longer.


We crossed the grounds with a rapid step, in an9uish.The captain of the archers led us toward the 
infirmary, and as we arrived there we glimpsed in the thick grayness a stirring of shadows: monks 
and servants were rushing about, archers were standing outside the door to prevent access.
“Those guqrds were sent by me, to seek a man who could shed light on many mysteries,“ Bernard said.
"The brother herbalis†*" †he abbo† asked, dumbfounded.

“No. You will see now,” Bernard said, making his way inside.
We entered Severinus's laboratory, and here a painful sight greeted our eyes. The unfortunate 
herbalist lay, a corpse, in a pool of blood, his heod bashed in. On every side the shelves seemed 
to hove been devastated by a storm: pots, bottles, books, documents lay all around in great 
disorder, ruined.
Beside the body was an armillary sphere at least twice the size of a man‘s head, of finely worked 
metal, surmounted by a gold cross, and set on a short, decorated tripod. On other occasions I had 
noticed it on the table to the left of the front door.
At the other end of the room two archers were holding the cellarer fast, though he wriggled and 
proclaimed his innocence, increasing his noise when he saw the abbot enter. "My lord!" he cried 
out. "Appearances are against me! Severinus was already dead when I came in, and they found me 
staring at this massacre, speechless!“
The archers' captain went over to Bernard, and with his permission made a report, in front of 
everyone. The archers had been ordered to find the cellarer and arrest him, and for over two hours 
they had searched for him throughout the abbey. This, I thought, must have been the command Bernard 
had given before entering the hall; and the soldiers, foreigners in this place, had probably 
pursued their search in the wrong places, without realizing thot the cellarer, unaware of his fate, 
was with the others in the narthex; the fog had also made their hunt more difficult. In any case, 
from the captain's words it emerged that Remigio, after I left him, went toward the kitchen, where 
someone sctw him and informed the archers, who reached the Aedificium after Remigio had left it 
agctin, missing them only by a moment. In the kitchen was Jorge, who declared he had just finished 
speaking with the cellarer. The archers then explored the grounds in the direction of the gardens, 
and there, emerging from the mist like a ghost, they found old Alinardo, who seemed lost. It was 
Alinardo who said he had seen the cellarer, a short while before, going into the infirmary. The 
archers went there and found
the door open. Once inside, they discovered Severinus lifeless and the cellarer furiously rumma9Flu 
over the shelves, flinging everything on the floor, as if he were hunting for something. It was 
easy to see what had happened, the captain concluded. Remigio had entered, had attacked the 
herbalist and killed him, and then was seeking the thing for which he had killed.
An archer picked the armillary sphere up from the floor and handed it to Bernard. The elegant 
architecture of brass and silver circles, held together by a stronger frame of bronze rings grasped 
by the stem of the tripod, had been brought down heavily on the victim's skull, and at the impact 
many of the finer circles had shattered or bent to one side. This side was the one brought down on 
Severinus's head, as was revealed by †races of blood and even †uf†s of hair and horrible gobbe†s of 
cerebral matter.


William bent over Severinus to verify his death. The poor man‘s eyes, veiled by the streams of 
blood from his head, were fixed, and I wondered if it were ever possible to read in the stiffened 
pupil, as it has been said in some cases, the image of the murderer, the last vestige of the 
victim's perception. I saw that William sought the dead man's hands, to see if he had black stains 
on his fingers, even though, this time, the cause of dectth was obviously quite different: but 
Severinus was wearing the some leather gloves with which I had occasionally seen him handling 
dangerous herbs, lizards, and unfamiliar insects.

Meanwhile, Bernard Gui was addressing the cellarer: “Remigio of Voragine—that is your name, is it 
not* I had sent my men after you on the basis of other accusations and to confirm other suspicions. 
Now I see that I acted properly, although, to my regret, too slowly. My lord,” he said to the 
abbot, “I hold myself virtually responsible for this last crime, because I have known since this 
morning thot this man should be taken into custody, after I heard the revelations of that other 
wretch, arrested lost ni9ht.But as you saw for yourself, dUrin9 the morning I was occupied with 
other duties, and my men did their best. ”
He spoke in a loud voice so thctt all those present could heqr (and the room had mectnwhile filled 
up, people crowding into every corner, looking at the things scattered and destroyed, pointing to 
the corpse and commenting in low voices on the crime), and, as he spoke, I glimpsed Malachi in the 
little crowd, grimly observing the scene. The cellarer, about to be dragged away, also glimpsed 
him. He wrested himself from the archer's grasp and flung himself on his brother, grabbing him by 
the habit and speaking to him briefly and desperately, his face close to the other man's, until the 
archers seized him again. But, as he was being led off roughly, he turned again toward Malachi and 
shouted at him, “You swear, and I swear!”

Mqlachi did not answer at once, as if he were seeking the most suitable words. Then, as the 
cellctrer was being pulled across the threshold, he said, “I will do nothing to harm you.”

William and I looked at eoch other, wondering what was the meaning of this scene. Bernard had also 
observed i†, bu† did no† appear upse† by i†; rq†her, he smiled q† Malctchi, as if †o approve his 
words and to seal with him a sinister bargain. Then he announced that immediately after our meal a 
first court would meet in the chapter hall to open this investigation publicly. And he went out, 
ordering the cellarer to be taken to the forges, but not allowed to speak with Salvatore.

At that moment we heard Benno caIIin9 Us, at our back. “I came in 9ht qfter you,” he said in a 
whisper, “when the room was still half empty, and Malachi was not here.”
“He must have entered afterward,” William said.
“No,” Benno insisted, “I was near the door, I saw the people come in. I tell you, Malochi wos 
already inside  before.”
“Before what*”


“Before the cellarer entered. I cannot sweqr it, but I believe he came from behind that curtain, 
when there were already many of us in here.” And he nodded toward an ample hanging that concealed 
the bed where Severinus had usually made anyone who had been given some medication lie down and 
rest.

“Are you insinuating he killed Severinus and hid there when the cellarer came in*” William asked.

“Or else from behind the curtain he witnessed what happened out here. Why, otherwise, would the 
cellarer have implored him not to harm him, promising in return not to do him harm, either*”

“Tha† is possible,” William said. “In any case, †here was a book here and i† should s†iII be here, 
because both the cellarer ond Malachi went out empty-handed.” William knew from my report that 
Benno knew; and at that moment he needed help. He went over to the abbot, who was sadly observing 
Severinus's corpse: William asked him to make everyone leave, because he wanted to examine the 
place more closely. The abbot consented and then left, not without giving William a skeptical look, 
as if reprooching him for olways arriving †oo Ia†e. Malachi †ried †o remain, inventing various 
reasons, oll quite vogue; William pointed out that this was not the library, and that here Malachi 
could claim no rights. William was polite but inflexible, qnd he got his revenge for the time when 
Malqchi had not allowed him to examine Venantius's desk.

When only three of us were left, William cleared the rubble and papers away from one of the tables 
and told me to hand him, one after another, the books in Severinus's collection. A small 
collection, compared wi†h †he immense one of †he labyrinth, bu† still there were dozens and dozens 
of volumes, of various sizes, which had formerly stood neatly on the shelves and now lay in 
disorder on the ground among other objects, already disturbed by the cellarer‘s frantic hands, some 
even torn, as if he were seeking not a book but something that could be placed between the pages of 
a book. Some had been ripped violently, separated from their binding. To collect them, rapidly 
ascertain their subject, and pile them up on the table was no easy undertaking; and everything had 
to be done in haste, because the abbot had given us little time: the monks had to come in and lay 
out Severinus's battered body and prepare it for burial. We also had to move about, search under 
the tables, behind the shelves, in the cupboards, to see whether anything hqd escaped the first 
inspection. William would not let Benno help me and allowed him only to stand guard at the door. 
Despite the abbot‘s orders, many were pressing to enter: servants terrified by the news, monks 
mourning their brother, novices carrying clean cloths and basins of water to wash and enshroud the 
corpse. ..
So we had to oct fast. I grabbed the books and handed them to William, who examined them and set 
them on the table. Then we realized it was a long job, and we proceeded together: I would pick up a 
book, smooth it out if it was ruffled, read its title, and set it down. In many cases there were 
only sco††ered poges.

“De plantis libri tres. Damnation, that's not it,” William said, slamming the book on the table. 
“Thesaurus herbarum,” I said, and William snapped, “Drop it: we're looking for a Greek book!”
“This*” I asked, showing him a work whose pages were covered with abstruse letters. And William 
said, “No, that's Arabic, idiot! Bacon was right: the scholar's first duty is to learn languages!”


“But you don't know Arabic, either!" I replied, irked, to which William answered, “At leqst I 
understand when it is Arabic!“ And I blushed, because I could hear Benno snickering behind my back.

There were many books, and even more notes, scrolls with drawings of the heavenly vault, catalogues 
of strange pIon†s, wri††en on sco††ered pqges, probably by †he dead man. We worked a long †ime, 
exploring every corner of the laboratory. William, with great coldness, even shifted the corpse to 
see whether there was anything beneath it, and he rummaged inside the habit. Nothing.
“It has to be done,” he said. “Severinus locked himself in here with a book. The cellarer didn‘t 
have it.

“Con he have hidden it inside his habit*” I asked. “No, the book I saw the other morning under 
Venontius's desk was big, and we would hove noticed.”

"How was it bound*“ I osked.

“I don't know. It was lying open, and I sctw it only for ct few seconds, just long enough to 
realize it wets in Greek, but I remember nothing else. Let us continue; the cellarer didn't take 
it, nor, I believe, did Malachi.“

"Absolutely no†,” Benno confirmed. “When †he cellarer grabbed him by †he ches†, i† was obvious he 
could have nothing under his scopular.“

"Good. Or, ra†her, bad. If †he book is no† in †his room, obviously someone else, besides Malachi 
and the cellarer, had come in here before.”

"A third person, then, who killed Severinus*“ "Too many people," William soid.
"But anyway,” I asked, "who could have known the book was here*“ "Jorge, for example, if he 
overheard us.”
"Yes," I said, "but Jorge couldn't have killed a strong man like Severinus, and with such 
violence."

"No, certainly not. Besides, you saw him going toward the Aedificium, and the archers found him in 
the kitchen shortly before they found the cellarer. So he wouldn‘t have had time to come here and 
then go back to the kitchen."

“Let me think with my own head,“ I said, aiming at emulating my master. “Alinardo was moving around 
in the vicinity, but he, too, can hardly stand, and he couldn't have overpowered Severinus. The 
cellarer was here, but the time between his leaving the kitchen and the arrival of the archers was 
so short thot I think it would have been difficult for him to make Severinus open the door, to 
attack and kill him, and then to make all this mess. Malachi could have come before them all: Jorge 
hears us in the narthex, he goes to the scriptorium to tell Malachi that a book from the library is 
in Severinus's


laboratory, Malachi comes here, persuades Severinus to open the door, and kills him, God knows why. 
But if he was looking for the book, he should have recognized it, without all this ransacking, 
because he's the librarian! So who‘s left*“
“Benno,” William said.
Benno shook his head, in vigorous denial. “No, Brother William, you know I was consumed with 
curiosity. Bu† if I had come in here and had been able †o leave wi†h †he book, I would no† be here 
now keeping you compony: I would be examining my treasure somewhere else.  ”
“An almost convincing argument,” William said, smiling. “However, you don't know what the book 
looks
like, either. You could have killed and now you would be here trying to identify the book.”

Benno blushed violently. “I am not a murderer!” he protested.
“No one is, until he commits his first crime,” William soid philosophically. “Anyway, the book is 
missing, and this is sufficient proof that you didn't leave it here.”

Then he turned to contemplate the corpse. He seemed only at that point to take in his friend's 
death. “Poor Severinus,” he said, “I had suspected even you and your poisons. And you were 
expecting some trick with poison; otherwise you wouldn't have worn those gloves. You feared a 
danger of the earth and instead it came to you from the heavenly vault. ” He picked up the sphere 
again, observing it with
attention. “I wonder why they used thit particular weapon. ”
“It was within reach.”
“Perhaps. But there were other things, pots, gardening tools.  It is a fine example of the craft of
metals and of astronomical science. It is ruined and  Good heavens!” he cried,
“What is it*”
“And the third part of the sun was smitten and the third part of the moon and the third part of the 
stars ” he quoted.
I knew all too well the text of John the apostle. “The fourth trumpet,” I exclaimed.
“In fact. First hail, then blood, then water, and now the stars  If this is the case, then 
everything
must be re-examined: the murderer did not strike at random, he was following a plan.  But is it
possible to imagine a mind so evil thqt he kills only when he can do so while followin9the dictates 
of
†he book of †he Apocalypse*”
“What will happen with the fifth trumpet*” I asked, terrified. I tried to recall: ’And I saw a star 
fallen from heaven unto the earth and to him was given the key of the bottomless pit.  Will
somebody die by drowning in the well*”


“The fifth trumpet also promises many other things,” William sqid. “From the pit will come the 
smoke of a great furnace, then locusts will come from it to torment mankind with a sting similar to 
a scorpion's. And the shape of the locusts will resemble that of horses, with gold crowns on their 
heads and lions' teeth.  Our man could have various means at his disposal to carry out the words of 
the
book. ... But we must not pursue fantasies. Let us try, rather, to remember what Severinus said to 
us when he informed us he had found †he book. ”

“You †oId him †o bring i† †o you and he said he couldn’†. ”

“So he did, and then we were interrupted. Why couldn‘t he* A book can be carried. And why did he 
put on gloves* Is there something in the book's binding connected with the poison that killed 
Berengar and Venontius* A mysterious trap, a poisoned tip ”

“A snake!” I said.

“Why not a whale* No, we are indulging in fantasies agoin. The poison, as we have seen, had to 
enter the mouth. Besides, Severinus didn't actually sqy he couldn't carry the book. He said he 
preferred to show it to me here. And then he put on his gloves. So we know this book must be 
handled with
gloves. And that goes for you, too, Benno, if you find it, as you hope to. And since you‘re being 
so
helpful, you can help me further. Go up to the scriptorium again and keep an eye on Malachi. Don't 
let him out of your sight.”

“I will!” Benno said, and he went out, happy at his mission, it seemed to us.

We could restrain the other monks no longer, ond the room was invaded. Mealtime was now post, and 
Bernard was probably assembling his tribunal in the chapter house.

“There is nothing more to be done here,” William said.

With the infirmary, we abandoned my poor hypothesis, and qs we were crossing the vegetable garden I 
asked William whether he reolly trusted Benno. “Not entirely,” William said, “but we told him 
nothing he didn‘t already know, and we have made him fear the book. And, finally, in setting him to 
watch Malachi, we are also setting Malachi to watch him, and Malachi is obviously looking for the 
book on his

“What did the cellarer want, then*”

“We‘ll soon know. Certainly he wanted something, and he wanted it quickly, to avert some danger 
that was terrifying him. This something must be known to Malachi: otherwise there would be no 
explanation of Remigio's desperate plea to him. ”

“Anyway, the book has vanished. ”

“This is the most unlikely thing,” William said, os we arrived ot the chapter house. “If it was 
there, as
Severinus told us it was, either it's been taken away or it‘s there still.”


“And since it isn't there, someone has token it away,” I concluded.
“It is also possible that the argument should proceed from another minor premise. Since everything 
confirms †he lac† †ha† nobody can have †aken i† away ...”
“Then it should be there still. But it is not there.”
“Just a moment. We say it isn't there because we didn't find it. But perhaps we didn't find it 
because we haven‘t seen it where it was.”
“But we looked everywhere!”
“We looked, but did not see. Or else saw, but did not recognize. ... Adso, how did Severinus 
describe that book to us* What words did he use*”
“He said he had found a book that was not one of his, in Greek. ”
“No! Now I remember. He said a strange book. Severinus was a mon of learning, and for a man of 
learning a book in Greek is not strange; even if that scholar doesn't know Greek, he would at least 
recognize †he alphabe†. And a scholar wouldn‘† call a book in Arabic strange, ei†her, even if he 
doesn‘† know Arabic. ...” He broke off. “And wha† was an Arabic book doing in Severinus's 
laboratory*”
“But why should he have called an Arabic book strange*”
“This is the problem. If he called it strange it was because it had an unusual appearance, unusual 
at least for him, who was an herbalist and not a librarian. ... And in libraries it cqn hqppen that 
several ancient manuscripts are bound together, collecting in one volume various and curious texts, 
one in Greek, one in Aramaic ”
“. and one in Arqbic!” I cried, dazzled by this illumination.
William roughly dragged me out of the narthex and sent me running toward the infirmary. “You Teuton 
animal, you turnip! You ignoramus! You looked only at the first pages and not at the rest!”

“But, master,” I gasped, “you're the one who looked at the pa9es I showed you and said it was 
Arabic and not Greek!”
“Thot's true, Adso, that's true: I'm the animal. Now hurry! Run!”
We wen† back †o †he laboratory, bu† we had trouble entering, because †he novices were carrying ou† 
the corpse. Other curious visitors were roaming about the room. William rushed to the table and 
picked up the volumes, seeking the fatal one, flinging away one after another before the amazed 
eyes of those present, then opening and reopening them all agoin. Alas, the Arabic manuscript was 
no longer there. I remembered it vaguely becouse of its old cover, not strong, quite worn, with 
light metal bands.


“Who cctme in here ctfter I left*” William asked a monk. The monk shru9sed: it was clear thctt 
everyone and no one had come in.

We tried to consider the possibilities. Malachi* It was possible: he knew what he wanted, had 
perhaps spied on us, hqd seen us go out empty-handed, and had come back, sure of himself. Benno* I 
remembered that when William and I had gibed at each other over the Arabic text, he hod laughed. At 
the time I believed he was laughing at my ignorance, but perhaps he had been laughing at William's 
ingenuousness: he knew very well the various guises in which an ancient manuscript could appear, 
and perhops he had thought whot we did not think immediately but should have thought namely, that 
Severinus knew no Arabic, and so it was odd that he should keep among his books one he was unable 
to read. Or was there a third person*

William was deeply humiliated. I tried to comfort him; I told him thot for three days he had been 
looking for a text in Greek and it was natural in the course of his examination for him to discard 
all books not in Greek. And he answered that it is certainly humon to make mistakes, but there are 
some human beings who make more than others, and they are called fools, and he was one of them, and 
he wondered whether it was worth the effort to study in Paris and Oxford if one was then incapable 
of thinking †ho† manuscripts ore also bound in groups, a foc† even novices know, excep† s†upid ones 
like me, and a pair of clowns like the two of us would be a great success at fairs, and that was 
what we should do instead of trying to solve mysteries, especially when we were up against people 
far more clever than we.

“But there‘s no use weeping,” he concluded. “If Malachi took it, he has already replaced it in the 
library. And we would find it only if we knew how to enter the finis Africae. If Benno took it, he 
must hove assumed that sooner or later I would have the suspicion I did hove and would return to 
the laboratory, or he wouldn't hctve qcted in such haste. And so he must be hiding, qnd the one 
place where he has not hidden surely is the one where we would look for him immediately: namely, 
his cell.
Therefore, let's go back to the chapter house and see if during the interrogation the cellarer says 
anything useful. Because, after all, I still don't see Bernard‘s plan clearly; he was seeking his 
man before the death of Severinus, and for other reasons.”
We went back to the chapter. We would have done better to go to Benno's cell, because, as we were 
to learn later, our young friend did not have such a high opinion of William and had not thought he 
would go back to the laboratory so quickly; so, thinking he was not being sought from that quarter, 
he had
9 ne straight to his cell to hide the book.
But I will tell of this later. In the meantime dramatic and disturbing events took place, enough to 
make anyone forget about the mysterious book. And though we did not forget it, we were engaged by 
other urgent tasks, connected with the mission that William, after all, was supposed to fulfill.

NONES

In which justice is meted out, and there is the embarrassing impression that everyone is wrong.


Bernard Gui took his place at the center of the great walnut table in the chapter hall. Beside him 
a Dominican performed the function of notory, and two prelates of the papal legation sat flanking 
him, as judges. The cellarer was standing before the table, between two archers.

The abbo† †urned †o William and whispered: “I do no† know whether †his procedure is legi†imct†e. 
The
Lo†eronCounci|of1215 decreedin i†sCononThr†y-seven†ho†opersonconno†besummoned†o appear before 
judges whose seat is more than two days' march from his domicile. Here the situation is perhaps 
different: it is the judge who has come from a great distance, but ...”

“The inquisitor is exempt from all normal jurisdiction,” William said, “and does not have to follow 
the precepts of ordinary law. He enjoys a special privilege and is not even bound to hear lowyers.”

I looked at the cellarer. Remigio was in wretched shape. He looked around like a frightened animal, 
as if he recognized the movements and gestures of a liturgy he feared. Now I know he was afraid for 
two reasons, equally terrifying: one, that he had been caught, to all appearances, in flagrant 
crime; the other, that the day before, when Bernard had begun his inquiry, collecting rumors and 
insinuations, Remigio hqd already been afrqid his pqst would come to light; and his alarm hqd grown 
when he sqw them arrest Salvatore.

If the hapless Remigio was in the grip ;of his own fear, Bernard Gui, for his part, knew how to 
transform his victims' fear into terror. He did not speak: while all were now expecting him to 
begin the interrogation, he kept his hands on the papers he had before him, pretending to orrange 
them, but absently. His gaze was really fixed on the accused, and it was a gaze in which 
hypocritical indulgence (as if to say: Never fear, you are in the hands of a fraternal assembly 
that can only want your good) mixed with icy irony (os if to say: You do not yet know what your 
good is, and I will shortly tell you) and merciless severity (as if to sqy: But in any cqse I am 
your judge here, qnd you are in my power). All things thot the cellarer already knew, but which the 
judge's silence and delay served to moke him feel more deeply, so that, as he became more and more 
humiliated, his uneasiness would be transformed into desperation instead of relaxotion, ond he 
would belong entirely to the judge, soft wax in his hands.

Finally Bernard broke the silence. He uttered some ritual formulas, told the judges they would now 
proceed to the interrogation of the defendant with regard to two equally odious crimes, one of 
which was obvious †o all bu† less deploroble †hon †he o†her, because †he defendan† had been 
surprised in †he act of murder when he was actually being sought for the crime of heresy.

It was said. The cellarer hid his face in his hands, which he could move only with difficulty 
because they were bound in chains. Bernard begon the questioning.

“Who are you*” he asked.

“Remigio of Varagine. I was born fifty-two years ago, and while still a boy, I entered the convent 
of the Minorites in Varagine.”
“And how does it happen that today you are found in the order of Saint Benedict*”


“Years ago, when the Pope issued the bull Sancta Romana, because I wqs afraid of being infected by 
the heresy of the Froticelli ... though I had never shared their notions ... I thought it was 
better for my sinning soul to escape an atmosphere filled with seductions, and I applied and was 
received among the monks of this abbey, where for more than eight years I have served as cellarer.”

“You escoped the seductions of heresy,” Bernard mocked, “or, rather, you escaped the investigation 
of those who had determined to discover the heresy and uproot it, and the good Cluniac monks 
believed they were performing an act of charity in receiving you and those like you. But changing 
habit is not enough to erose from the soul the evil of heretical depravity, and so we are here now 
to find out whot lurks in the recesses of your impenitent soul and what you did before arriving at 
this holy place.”

“My soul is innocent and I do not know what you mean when you speok of heretical depravity,” the 
cellarer said cautiously.

“You see*” Bernard cried, addressing the other judges. “They‘re all alike! When one of them is 
arrested, he faces judgment os if his conscience were at peace and without remorse. And they do not 
realize this is the most obvious sign of their guilt, because a righteous man on trial is uneasy! 
Ask him whether he knows the reason why I had ordered his orrest. Do you know it, Remigio*”

“My lord,” the cellarer replied, “I would be happy to learn it from your lips.”

I was surprised, because it seemed to me the cellarer wos answering the ritual questions with 
equally ritual words, as if he were well versed in the rules of the investigation and its pitfalls 
and had long been trained to face such an eventuality.

“There,” Bernard cried, “the typical reply of the impenitent heretic! They cover trqils like foxes 
and it is very difficul† †o ca†ch †hem ou†, because †heir beliefs gron† †hem †he righ† †o lie in 
order †o evade due punishment. They recur to tortuous answers, trying to trap the inquisitor, who 
already has to endure contact with such loathsome people. So then, Remigio, you have never had 
anything to do with the so-called Fraticelli or Friars of the Poor Life, or the Beghards*”

“I experienced the vicissitudes of the Minorites when there was long debate about poverty, but I 
have never belonged to the sect of the Beghards!”

“You see*” Bernard said. “He denies ever hqving been a Beghqrd, because the Beghqrds, though they 
share the heresy of the Fraticelli, consider the latter a dead branch of the Franciscan order and 
consider themselves more pure and perfect. But much of the behavior of one group is like that of 
the others. Con you deny, Remigio, thot you have been seen in church, huddled down with your face 
against the wctll, or prostrate with your hood over your head, instead of kneeling with folded 
hands like other men*”
“Also in the order of Saint Benedict the monks prostrate themselves, at the proper times. ”

“I am not asking what you did at the proper times, but at the improper ones! So do not deny that 
you assumed one posture or the other, typical of the Beghards! But you are not a Beghard, you say.  
Tell
me, then: what do you believe*”




“My lord, I believe everything a good Christian should. ”

“A holy reply! And wha† does a good Christian believe*”

“What the holy church teaches.”
“And which holy church* The church that is so considered by those believers who call themselves 
perfect, the Pseudo Apostles, the heretical Fraticelli, or the church they compare to the whore of 
Babylon, in which all of us devoutly believe*”

“My lord,” the cellarer said, bewildered, “tell me which you believe is the true church. ”

“I believe i† is †he Roman church, one, holy, and apostolic, governed by †he Pope and his bishops.”

“So I believe,” the cellarer said.
“Admirable shrewdness!” the inquisitor cried. “Admirable cleverness de dicto! You all heard him: he 
means to say he believes that I believe in this church, and he evades the requirement of saying 
what he believes in! But we know well these weasel tricks! Let us come to the point. Do you believe 
that the sacraments were instituted by our Lord, that to do true penance you must confess to the 
servants of God, †ha† the Roman church has the power to loosen and to bind on this earth †ho† which 
will be bound and loosened in heaven*”
“Should I not believe that*”

“I did no† ask wha† you should believe, bu† wha† you do believe!”

“I believe everything that you and the other good doctors command me to believe,” the frightened 
cellarer sqid.

“Ah! But are not the good doctors you mention perhaps those who command your sect* Is this what you 
meant when you spoke of the good doctors* Are these perverse liars the men you follow in 
recognizing your articles of faith* You imply that if I believe what they believe, then you will 
believe me; otherwise you will believe only them!”

“I did not say that, my lord,” the cellarer stammered. “You are making me say it. I believe you, if 
you teach me what is good.”

“Oh, what impudence!” Bernard shouted, slamming his fist on the table. “You repeat from memory with 
grim obstinacy †he formula †hey †each in your sec†. You say you will believe me only if I preach 
wha† your sect considers good. Thus the Pseudo Apostles have always answered and thus you answer 
now, perhops without reolizing it, because from your lips agoin the words emerge that you were once 
trained for deceiving inquisitors. And so you are accusing yourself with your own words, and I 
would fall into your trap only if I had not had a long experience of inquisition.  But let us come 
to the real
question, perverse man! Have you ever heard of Gherardo Segarelli of Parma*”



“I hove heard him spoken of,” the cellarer said, turning poIe„ if one could still speak of pallor 
on that destroyed face.
“Have you ever heard of Fra Dolcino of Novara*”
“I have heard him spoken of.”
“Have you ever seen him in person and had conversation with him*”

The cellarer remained silent for o few moments, as if to gauge how far he should go in telling a 
part of the truth. Then he made up his mind and soid' in a faint voice, “I have seen him and spoken 
with him.”

“Louder!” Bernard shouted. “Let a word of truth finally be heard escaping your lips! When did you 
speak with him*”

“My lord,” the cellarer said, “I wqs a monk in a convent neqr Novarq when Dolcino's people gathered 
in those ports, and they even went past my convent, and ot first no one knew clearly who they were. 
”

“You lie! How could a Franciscan of Varagine be in a convent in the Novara region* You were not in 
a conven†, you were already a member of a band of Fra†icelli roaming around †hose lands and living 
on alms, and †hen you joined †he Dolcinions!”

“How can you assert that, sir*” the cellarer asked, trembling.
“I will tell you how I cqn, indeed I must, assert it,” Bernard sqid, and he ordered Sqlvatore to be
brough† in.

The sight of the wretch, who hod certainly spent the night under his own interrogation, not public 
and more severe than this one, moved me to pity. Sqlvatore‘s face, as I have sqid, was horrible 
normally, but that morning it was more bestial thon ever. And though it showed no signs of 
violence, the way his chained body moved, the limbs disjointed, almost incapable of walking, the 
way he was dragged by the archers like a monkey tied to a rope, revealed very clearly how his 
ghastly questioning must have proceeded.

“Bernard has tortured him ...” I murmured to William.

“Not at all,” William answered. “An inquisitor never tortures. The custody of the defendant's body 
is always entrusted to the seculctr arm.”

“But it‘s the same thing!” I said.

“Not in the least. It isn‘t the same thing for the inquisitor, whose honds remain clean, or for the 
accused, who, when the inquisitor arrives, suddenly finds support in him, an easing of his 
sufferings, and so he opens his heart.”


I looked ctt my master. “You're jesting,” I said, aghast. “Do these seem things to jest about*” 
William replied.
Bernard was now questioning Sqlvatore, and my pen cannot transcribe the mon‘s broken words—if it 
were possible, more Babelish than ever, as he answered, unmanned, reduced to the state of a baboon, 
while all understood him only with difficulty. Guided by Bernard, who asked the questions in such a 
way that he could reply only yes or no, Salvatore was unable to tell any lies. And what Salvatore 
said my reader can easily imagine. He told, or confirmed that he had told during the night, a port 
of thot story I had already pieced together: his wanderings as a Fraticello, Shepherd, and Pseudo 
Apostle; and how in the days of Fra Dolcino he met Remigio among the Dolcinians and escaped with 
him, following the Bottle of Monte Rebello, taking refuge after various ups and downs in the Casale 
convent. Further, he added that the heresiarch Dolcino, near defeat and capture, had entrusted to 
Remigio certain letters, to be carried he did not know where or to whom. And Remigio always carried 
those letters with him, never during to deliver them, and on his arrival at the abbey, afraid of 
keeping them on his person but not wanting to destroy them, he entrusted them to the librarian, 
yes, to Malachi, who was to hide them somewhere in the recesses of the Aedificium.

As Salvatore spoke, the cellarer was looking at him with hatred, and at a certain point he could 
not restrain himself from shouting, “Snake, lascivious monkey, I was your father, friend, shield, 
and this is how you repay me!”

Salvatore looked at his protector, now in need of protection, and answered, with an effort, “Lord 
Remigio, while I could be, I was your man. And you were to me dilectissimo. But you know the chief 
cons†able‘s fomily. Qui non habe† caballum vado† cum pede.  ”

“Madman!” Remigio shouted ot him again. “Are you hoping to save yourself* You, too, will die as o 
heretic, you know* Say that you spoke under torture; say you invented it all!”

“What do I know, lord, what all these heresias qre called. ... Pqtarini, gazzesi, leoniste, 
arnaldiste, speronis†e, circoncisi ... I om no† homo li†ero†us. I sinned wi†h no malicia, ond 
Signor gernordo Magnificentissimo knows it, and I am hoping in his indulgencia in nomine patre et 
filio et spiritis sanctis

“We shall be indulgent insofar as our office allows,” the inquisitor said, “and we shall consider 
with paternal benevolence the good will with which you have opened your spirit. Go now, go and 
meditate further in your cell, and trust in the mercy of the Lord. Now we must debate a question of 
quite different import. So, then, Remigio, you were carrying with you some letters from Dolcino, 
and you 9qve them to your brother monk who is responsible for the library.  ”
“That is not true, not true!” the cellarer cried, as if such a defense could still be effective. 
And, rightly, Bernard interrupted him: “But you are not the one who must confirm this: it is 
Malachi of Hildesheim.”

He had the librarian called, but Malachi was not among those present. I knew he was either in the 
scriptorium or near the infirmary, seeking Benno and the book. They went to fetch him, and when he


appeared, distraught, trying to look no one in the fqce, William muttered with dismay, “And now 
Benno is free to do what he pleases.“ But he was mistaken, because I saw Benno's face peep up over 
the shoulders of the other monks crowding around the door of the hall, to follow the interrogation. 
I pointed him out to William. We thought that Benno's curiosity about what was happening was even 
stronger than his curiosity about the book. Lqter we learned that, by then, he had already 
concluded an ignoble bargain of his own.
Malachi appeared before the judges, his eyes never meeting those of the cellarer.
"Malachi," Bernard said, “this morning, after 5alvatore's confession during the night, I asked you 
whether you had received from the defendant here present ony letters. ”
"Malachi!” the cellarer cried. “You swore you would do nothing to harm me!“
Malachi shifted slightly toward the defendant, to whom his back wos turned, and said in a low 
voice, which I could barely hear, “I did not swear falsely. If I could have done anything to harm 
you, it was done already. The letters were handed over to Lord Bernard this morning, before you 
killed Severinus.

"But you know, you must know. I didn't kill Severinus! You know because you were there before me!“

"I*" Malachi asked. “I went in there after they discovered you.“
"Be that as it may,” Bernard interrupted, "what were you looking for in Severinus's laboratory, 
Remigio*”

The cellarer turned to Williom with dazed eyes, then looked at Malachi, then at Bernard again. "But 
this morning I ... I heard Brother William here present tell Severinus to guard certain papers  and
since las† nigh†, since Salva†ore was captured, I hove been afraid those letters—“

"Then you know something about those letters!“ Bernard cried triumphantly. The cellarer at this 
point was trapped. He was caught between two necessities: to clear himself of the accusation of 
heresy, and to dispel the suspicion of murder. He must have decided to face the second 
accusation—instinctively, because by now he was acting by no rule, and without counsel. “I will 
talk about the letters later.  I
will explain ... I will tell how they came into my possession.  But let me tell what hoppened this
morning. I thought there would be talk of those letters when I saw Salvatore fall into the hands of 
Lord Bernard: for years the memory of those letters has been tormenting my heart  Then when I
heard William and Severinus speaking of some papers ... I cannot say  overcome with fear, I thought
Malachi had got rid of them and given them to Severinus.  I wanted to destroy them and so I went to
Severinus. ... The door was open and Severinus was already dead, I started searching through his 
things for the letters. ... I was just afraid. ”
William whispered into my ear, “Poor fool, fearing one danger, he has plunged headlong into 
another. ”
“Let us assume that you are telling almost—I say, almost—the truth,” Bernard intervened. “You 
thought Severinus had the letters and you looked for them in his laboratory. And why did you think 
he


had them* Why did you first kill the other brothers* Did you perhaps think those letters had for 
some time been passing through many hands* Is it perhaps customary in this obbey to gother relics 
of burned heretics*“

I saw †he abbo† s†ar†. Nothing could be more insidious †han qn accusct†ion of collecting relics of 
heretics, and Bernard was very sly in mixing the murders with heresy, and every thing with the life 
of the abbey. I was interrupted in my reflections by the cellarer, who was shouting that he had 
nothing to do with the other crimes. Bernard indulgently calmed him: this, for the moment, was not 
the question they were discussing, Remigio was being interrogated for a crime of heresy, and he 
should not attempt (and here Bernard's voice became stern) to draw attention away from his 
heretical past by speaking of Severinus or trying to cast suspicion on Malachi. So he should 
therefore return to the letters.

"Malachi of Hildesheim," he said, addressing the witness. “You are not here as a defendant. This 
morning you answered my questions and my request with no attempt to hide anything. Now you will 
repeat here what you said to me this morning, and you will have nothing to fear.”

"I repeat what I said this morning,” Malachi said. "A short time after Remigio arrived up here, he 
began to take charge of the kitchen, and we met frequently for reasons connected with our duties—as 
librarian, I am charged with shutting up the whole Aedificium at night, and therefore also the 
kitchen. I have no reason †o deny †ha† we became close friends, nor had I any reason †o harbor 
suspicions of this man. He told me that he had with him some documents of a secret nature, 
entrusted to him in confession, which should not fall into profane hands and which he dared not 
keep himself. Since I was in charge of the only part of the monastery forbidden to all the others, 
he asked me to keep those papers, far from any curious gaze, and I consented, never suspecting the 
documents were of a heretical nature, nor did I even read them as I placed them ... I placed them 
in the most inaccessible of the secret rooms of the library, and after that I forgot this matter, 
until this morning, when the lord inquisitor mentioned the papers to me, and then I fetched them 
and handed them over to him.  “
The abbot, frowning, took the floor. "Why did you not inform me of this agreement of yours with the 
cellarer* The library is no† intended †o house †hings belonging †o †he monks!“ The obbo† had made 
i† clear that the abbey had no connection with this business.

"My lord,” Molachi answered, confused, "it seemed to me a thing of scarce importonce. I sinned 
without malice.”

"Of course, of course,” Bernard said, in a cordial tone, "we are all convinced the librarian acted 
in good foith, and his frankness in collaborating with this cour† is proof. I fra†ernaIIy beg Your 
Magnificence not to chastise him for this imprudent act of the past. We believe Malachi. And we ask 
him only to confirm now, under oath, that the papers I will now show him are those he gave me this 
morning and are those that Remigio of Varagine consigned to him years ago, after his arrival at the 
abbey.“ He displayed two parchments among the papers lying on the table. Malachi looked at them and 
said in a firm voice, "I swear by God †he Fa†her Almighty, by †he mos† holy Virgin, and by all †he 
soin†s †ha† so i† is and so i† was.”
"That is enough for me,” Bernard said. "You may go, Malachi of Hildesheim.”



Jus† before Malachi reached the door, his head bowed, a voice was heard from the curious crowd 
packed at the rear of the hall: “You hid his letters and he showed you the novices' asses in the 
kitchen!” There was some scattered laughter, and Malachi hurried out, pushing others aside left and 
righ†. I could hctve sworn †he voice wets Aymaro's, bu† †he words had been shouted in fctlsetto. 
The abbot, his face purple, shouted for silence and threatened terrible punishments for all, 
commanding the monks to clear the hall. Bernard smiled treacherously; Cardinal Bertrand, at one 
side of the hall, bent to the ear of Jean d'Anneaux and said something to him. The other man 
reacted by covering his mouth with his hand and bowing his head as if he were coughing. William 
said to me, “The cellorer was not only a carnal sinner for his own purposes; he also acted as 
procurer. But Bernard cares nothing about that, except that it embarrasses Abo, the imperial 
mediator.  ”

He was interrupted by Bernard, who now spoke straight to him. “I would also be interested to know 
from you, Brother William, what papers you were talking about this mornin9 with Severinus, when the 
cellarer overheard you and misunderstood.”
William returned his gctze. “He did misunderstand me, in fact. We were referring to ct copy of the
†rea†ise on canine hydrophobia by Ayyub aI-Ruhawi, a remarkably erudite book †ha† you mus† surely 
know of by reputation, and which must often have been of great use to you. Hydrophobia, Ayyub says, 
may be recognized by twenty-five evident signs.  ”

Bernord, who belonged to the order of the Dominicans, the Domini canes, the Lord's dogs, did not 
consider it opportune to start another battle. “So the matters were extraneous to the case under 
discussion,” he said rapidly. And the trial continued.

“Le† us come back †o you, Brother Remigio, Minori†e, fqr more dangerous †han ct hydrophobic dog. If 
Brother William in these past few days had paid more attention to the drool of heretics than to 
that of dogs, perhaps he would also have discovered what a viper was nesting in the abbey. Let us 
go back to these letters. Now, we know for certain that they were in your hands and thot you took 
care to hide them cts if they were ct most poisonous thing, ctnd that you actually killed”—with q 
gesture he forestalled an attempt at denial—“and of the killing we will speok later  that you 
killed, I was saying,
so that I would never have them. So you recognize these papers as your possessions*”
The cellarer did not answer, but his silence was sufficiently eloquent. So Bernard insisted: “And 
what are these papers* They are two pages written in the hand of the heresiarch Dolcino, a few days 
before his capture. He entrusted them to a disciple who would take them to others of his sect still 
scattered about Italy. I could read you everything said in them, how Dolcino, fearing his imminent 
end, entrusts a message of hope—he says to his brethren—in the Devil! He consoles them, and though 
the da†es he announces here do no† coincide with †hose of his previous Ie††ers, when for †he year 
1305 he promised the complete destruction of all priests at the hand of the Emperor Frederick, 
still, he declares, this destruction was not far off. Once again the heresiarch was lying, because 
twenty and more years have gone by since that day, and none of his sinful predictions has come 
true. But it is not the ridiculous presumption of these prophecies that we must discuss but, 
rather, the fact that Remigio was their bearer. Can you still deny, heretical and impenitent monk, 
that you had traffic and cohabitation with the sect of the Pseudo Apostles*”


The cellarer at this point could deny no longer. "My lord," he said, “my youth was filled with the 
direst errors. When I learned of the preaching of Dolcino, already seduced as I was by the Friars 
of the Poor Life, I believed in his words and I joined his band. Yes, it is true, I was with them 
in the regions of Brescia and Bergamo, I was with them at Como and in Valsesia, with them I took 
refuge on Bald Mountain and in the Rassa Vqlley, qnd finally on Monte Rebello. But I never took 
pqrt in qny evil deed, and when they began their sacking and their violence, I still maintained 
within me the spirit of meekness that was the quality of the sons of Francis, and on Monte Rebello 
itself I told Dolcino I no longer felt capable of participating in their battle, and he gave me 
permission to leave, because, he soid, he did not want cowards with him, and he osked me only to 
take those letters for him to Bologna.

"To whom*" Cardinal Bertrand asked.
“To some sectarians of his, whose names I believe I can remember, and when I remember them, I will
†eII †hem †o you, my lord,” Remigio hastily affirmed. And he u††ered †he nomes of some men †ho† 
Cordinol Bertrond seemed to know, because he smiled with a contented look, exchanging a nod of 
approval with Bernard.

"Very well,” Bernard said, and he made a note of those names. Then he asked Remigio, "And why are 
you now handing your friends over to us*“

"They are not friends of mine, my lord, and the proof is thot I never delivered the letters. 
Indeed, I went further, and I will say it now after having tried to forget it for so many years: in 
order to leave that place without being seized by the Bishop of Vercelli's army, which was awaiting 
us on the plain, I managed to get in touch with some of his men, and in exchange for a safe-conduct 
I told them the passages that were good for attacking Dolcino's fortifications, so that the success 
of the church‘s troops was in part due to my collaboration. “

“Very interesting. This tells us that you were not only a heretic, but also a coward and a traitor. 
Which does no† oI†er your si†uq†ion. jus† as †oday you †ried †o save yourself by accusing Malachi, 
who had done you a favor, so, †hen, †o save yourself you handed your companions in sin over †o †he 
forces of law. But you betrayed their bodies, never their teachings, and you kept those letters as 
relics, hoping one day to have the courage, and the opportunity without running any risks, to 
deliver them, to win again the favor of the Pseudo Apostles.“
“No, my lord, no,“ the cellarer said, covered with sweat, his hands shaking. “No, I swear to you 
that “
"An oath!” Bernard soid. “Here is another proof of your guile! You wont to swear because you know 
that I know how Waldensian heretics are prepared to use any duplicity, and even to suffer death, 
rather than swear! And if fear overcomes them, they pretend to swear and mutter false oaths! But I 
am well aware you do not belong to the sect of the Poor of Lyons, you wicked fox, and you are 
trying to convince me you are no† wha† you are no† so I will no† say you are wha† you are! You 
swear, do you* You swear, hoping to be absolved, but I tell you this: a single oath is not enough 
for me! I con require one, two, three, a hundred, as many as I choose. I know very well that you 
Pseudo Apostles grant dispensations to those who swear false oaths rather than betray the sect. And 
so every oath will be further proof of your guil†!“



"But what must I do, then*” the cellarer shouted, falling to his knees.
"Do not prostrate yourself like a Beghard! You must do nothing. At this point, only I know what 
must be done," Bernard sqid, with q terrible smile. "You must only confess. And you will be damned 
and condemned if you confess, and damned and condemned if you do no† confess, because you will be 
punished as a perjurer! So confess, then, if only to shorten this most painful interrogation, which 
distresses our consciences and our sense of meekness and compassion!”
“But what must I confess*”
“Two orders of sins: That you were in the sect of Dolcino, that you shared, its heretical notions, 
and its actions and its offenses to the dignity of the bishops and the city magistrates, that you 
impenitently continue in those lies and illusions, even thou9h the heresiarch is dead and the sect 
has been dispersed, though not entirely extirpated and destroyed. And that, corrupted in your 
innermost spirit by the practices learned among the foul sect, you are guilty of the disorders 
against God and man perpetrated in this abbey, for reasons that still elude me but which need not 
even be totally clarified, once it has been luminously demonstrated (as we are doing) that the 
heresy of those who preached and preach poverty, against the teachings of the lord Pope and his 
bulls, can only lead to criminal acts. This is what the faithful must learn, and this will be 
enough for me. Confess.”

What Bernard wanted was clear. Without the slightest interest in knowing who had killed the other 
monks, he wanted only to show that Remigio somehow shared the ideas propounded by the Emperor's 
theologians. And once he had shown the connection between those ideas, which were also those of the 
chapter of Perugia, and the ideas of the Fraticelli and the Dolcinions, and had shown that one man 
in
†hct† abbey subscribed †o all †hose heresies ctnd hctd been †he ctu†hor of many crimes, he would 
†hus hove deal† a truly mortal blow to his adversaries. I looked a† William and sow †ho† he had 
understood but could do nothing, even though he had foreseen it all. I looked at the abbot and saw 
his face was grim: he was realizing, belatedly, thot he, too, had been drawn into a trap, and that 
his own authority as mediator wqs crumbling, now thctt he wets going to appear to be lord of ct 
place where all the evils of the century had chosen to assemble. As for the cellarer, by now he no 
longer knew of what crime he might still try to proclaim his innocence. But perhaps at that moment 
he was incapable of any calculation; the cry that escaped his throat was the cry of his soul, and 
in it and with it he was releasing years of long and secret remorse. Or, rather, after a life of 
uncertainties, enthusiasms, and disappointments, cowardice and betrayal, faced with the 
ineluctability of his ruin, he decided to profess the faith of his youth, no longer asking himself 
whether it was right or wrong: but as if to prove to himself that he was capable of some faith.
“Yes, it is true,“ he shouted, “I was with Dolcino, and I shqred in his crimes, his license; 
perhaps I was mad, I confused the love of our Lord Jesus Christ with the need for freedom and with 
hatred of bishops. It is true that I have sinned, but I am innocent of everything that has happened 
in the abbey, I swear!”

"For the present we have ochieved something,” Bernard said, "since you odmit having practiced the 
heresy of the Dolcinians, the witch Margaret, and her companions. Do you admit being with them near 
Trivero, when they hanged many faithful Christians, including an innocent child of ten* And when 
they



hon9ed other men in the presence of their wives and parents because they would not submit to the 
whim of †hose dogs* Because, by †hen, blinded by your fury and pride, you †hough† no one could be 
saved unless he belonged to your community* Speak!“

“Yes, I believed those things and did those things!”
“And you were present when they captured some followers of the bishops and starved some to death in 
prison, and they cut off the arm and the hand of a woman with child, leaving her then to give birth 
to a baby who immediately died, unbap†ized* And you were with them when they se† fire and razed to 
the ground the villa9es of Mosso, Trivero, Cossila, and Clecchia, and many other localities in the 
zone of Crepacorio, and many houses of Mor†iliano and Quorino, and †hey burned †he church in 
Trivero after befouling the sacred images, tearing tombstones from the altars, breaking an arm of 
the statue of the Virgin, looting the chalices and vessels and books, destroying the spire, 
shattering the bells, seizing all the vessels of the confraternity and the possessions of the 
priest*”
“Yes, yes, I was there, and none of us knew what we were doing by then, we wanted to herald the 
moment of punishment, we were the vanguard of the Emperor sent by heqven and the holy Pope, we were 
to hasten the descent of the angel of Philadelphia, when all would receive the grace of the Holy 
Spirit and the church would be renewed, and after the destruction of all the perverse, only the 
perfect would reign!”

The cellarer seemed a† once possessed and illuminated, the dam of silence and simulation now seemed 
broken, his past was returning not only in words but also in images, and he was feeling again the 
emotions that at one time had exalted him.

“So,” Bernard resumed, “you confess that you have revered Gherardo Segarelli as a martyr, that you 
hove denied all power to the Roman church and declared that neither the Pope nor any authority 
could ordain for you a life different from the one your people led, that no one had the right to 
excommunicate you, that since the time of Saint Sylvester all the prelates of the church had been 
prevctricators qnd seducers except Peter of Morrone, that lqymen are not required to pcty tithes to 
priests who do not practice a condition of absolute perfection and poverty as the first apostles 
practiced, that tithes therefore should be paid to your sect alone, who are the only apostles and 
paupers of Chris†, †ha† †o pray †o God in a s†abIe or in a consecrated church is †he same †hing; 
you also confess thot you went through villages and seduced people crying ’Penitenziogite,’ thot 
you treacherously sang the 'Salve Regina’ to draw crowds, and you passed yourselves off as 
penitents leading a perfect life before the eyes of the world and then allowed yourselves every 
license and every lustfulness because you did not believe in the sacrament of matrimony or in any 
other sacrament, and, deeming yourselves purer than anyone else, you could allow yourselves every 
filthiness and every offense to your bodies and the bodies of others* Speak!”

“Yes, yes, I confess the true faith which I then believed with my whole soul, I confess that we 
took off our garments in sign of renunciation, †ha† we renounced all our belongings while you, race 
of dogs, will never renounce anything: and from that time on we never accepted money from anyone or 
carried any about our persons, and we lived on alms and we saved nothing for the morrow, and when 
they received us and set a table for us, we ate and went away, leaving on the table anything that 
remained.



“And you burned and looted to seize the possessions of good Christians!”
“And we burned and looted because we had proclaimed poverty the universal law, and we had the right
†o ctppropria†e †he illegi†ima†e riches of o†hers, and we wan†ed †o s†rike a† †he hear† of †he 
network of breed that extended from parish to parish, but we never looted in order to possess, or 
killed in order to loot; we killed to punish, to purify the impure through blood. Perhaps we were 
driven by an overweening. desire for justice: a man can sin also through overweening love of God, 
through superabundance of perfection. We were the true spiritual congregation sent by the Lord and 
destined for the glory of the last days; we sought our reward in paradise, hastening the time of 
your destruction. We alone were the apostles of Christ, all the others had betrayed him, and 
Gherardo Segorelli had been a divine plant, planta Dei pullulans in radice fidei; our Rule came to 
us directly from God. We had to kill the innocent as well, in order to kill all of you more 
quickly. We wanted a better world, of peace and sweetness and happiness for all, we wanted to kill 
the war that you brought on with your greed, becouse you reproached us when, to establish justice 
and happiness, we had to shed a little blood. ... The fact is ... the fact is that it did not take 
much, the hastening, and it was worth turning the waters of the Cctrnasco red that day at Stavello, 
there was our own blood, too, we did not spore ourselves, our blood and your blood, much of it, at 
once, immediately, the times of Dolcino‘s prophecy were at hand, we had to hasten the course of 
events.  ”

His whole body trembling, he rubbed his hands over his habit as if he wanted to cleanse them of the 
blood he wos recalling. “The glutton hos become pure again,” William said to me.
“But is this purity*” I asked, horrified.
“There must be some other kind qs well,” William said, “but, however it is, it always frightens 
me.” “What terrifies you most in purity*” I asked.
“Haste,” Willictm answered.
“Enough, enough,” Bernard was saying now. “We sought a confession from you, not a summons to 
massacre. Very well, not only have you been a heretic: you are one still. Not only have you been a 
murderer: you have murdered again. Now tell us how you killed your brothers in this obbey, and 
why.”

The cellarer stopped trembling, looked around as if he were coming out of a dream. “No,” he said, 
“I have nothing †o do wi†h †he crimes in †he abbey. I have confessed everything I did: do no† make 
me confess what I have not done. ”

“But what remains that you cannot have done* Do you now say you are innocent* O lamb, O model of 
meekness! You have heard him: he once had his hands steeped in blood and now he is innocent! 
Perhaps we were mistaken, Remigio of Varagine is a paragon of virtue, a loyal son of the church, an 
enemy of the enemies of Christ, he has always respected the order thot the hand of the church has 
toiled to impose on villages and cities, the peace of trade, the craftsmen's shops, the treasures 
of the churches. He is innocent, he has committed nothing. Here, come to my arms, Brother Remigio, 
that I may console you for the accusations that evil men have brought against you!” And as Remigio 
looked at


him with dazed eyes, es if he were all of a sudden believing in a finql absolution, Bernard resumed 
his demeanor and addressed the captain of the archers in a tone of command:

"It revolts me to have recourse to measures the church has always criticized when they are employed 
by the secular arm. But there is a Ictw thqt governs and directs even my personal feelings. Ask the 
abbot to provide a ploce where the instruments of torture can be installed. But do not proceed at 
once. For three days let him remain in a cell, with his hands and feet in irons. Then have the 
instruments shown him. Only shown. And then, on the fourth day, proceed. justice is not inspired by 
haste, as the Pseudo Apostles believe, and the justice of God has centuries at its disposal. 
Proceed slowly, and by degrees. And, above all, remember wha† has been said again and again. avoid 
mu†iIa†ions and the risk of death. One of the benefits this procedure grants the criminal is 
precisely that death be savored and expected, but it must not come before confession is full, and 
voluntary, and purifying."

The archers bent to lift the cellarer, but he planted his feet on the ground and put up resistance, 
indicating he wanted to speak. Given leove, he spoke, but the words could hardly come from his 
mouth, and his speech was like a drunkard's mumbling, and there was something obscene about it. 
Only gradually did he regain that kind of sqvage energy thqt had marked his confession a moment 
before.

“No, my lord. No, not torture. I am a cowardly man. I betrayed then, I denied for eleven years in 
this monastery my past faith, collecting tithes from vinedressers and peasants, inspecting stables 
and sties so that they would flourish and enrich the abbot; I have collaborated readily in the 
management of this estate of the Antichrist. And I was well off, I had forgotten my days of revolt, 
I wallowed in the pleasures of the palate and in others as well. I am a coward. Today I sold my 
former brothers of Bologna, then I sold Dolcino. And as a coward, disguised as one of the men of 
the crusade, I witnessed the capture of Dolcino and Margaret, when on Holy Saturday they were taken 
in the castle of Bugello. I wandered around Vercelli for three months until Pope Clement's letter 
ctrrived with the death sentence. And I saw Margate† cu† †o pieces before Dolcino's eyes, and she 
screamed, disemboweled as she was, poor body that I, too, had touched one night. ... And as her 
lacerated body was burning, they fell on Dolcino and pulled off his nose and his testicles with 
burning tongs, and it is not true what they sctid ctfterward, that he did not utter even a moqn. 
Dolcino was tctll and strong, he hctd a great devil's beard and red hair thot fell in curls to his 
shoulder blades, he was handsome and powerful when he led us, in his broad-brimmed ha† wi†h a 
plume, wi†h his sword girded over his habi†. Dolcino made men fear and women cry out with pleasure. 
 But when they tortured him he, too, cried, in pain, like a woman,
like a calf, he was bleeding from all his wounds as they carried him from one corner to another, 
and they continued to wound him slightly, to show how long an emissary of the Devil could live, and 
he wanted to die, he asked them to finish him, but he died too late, after he reached the pyre and 
was only a mass of bleeding flesh. I followed him and I congratulated myself on having escaped that 
trial, I was proud of my cleverness, and that rogue Solvatore was with me, and he said to me: How 
wise we were, Brother Remi9io, to act like sensible men, there is nothing nastier than torture! I 
would have
foresworn a thousand religions that day. And for years, many years, I have told myself how base I
was, and how happy I was to be base, and yet I was always hoping that I could demonstrate to myself 
that I was not such a coward. Today you have given me this strength, Lord Bernard: you have been 
for me what the pagan emperors were for the most cowardly of the martyrs. You have given me the 
courage †o confess wha† I believe in my soul, as my body falls away from i†. Bu† do no† demand †oo 
much courage of me, more than this mortal frame can bear. No, not torture. I will say whatever you 
wan†. Be††er †he s†ake a† once: you die of suffocation before you burn. No† †or†ure, like 
Dolcino's. No.


You want a corpse, and to have it you need me to assume the guilt for other corpses. I will be a 
corpse soon in any case. And so I will give you what you want. I killed Adelmo of Otranto out of 
hatred for his youth and for his wit in taunting monsters like me, old, fat, squat, and ignorant. I 
killed Venantius of Salvemec because he was too learned and read books I did not understand. I 
killed Berengar of Arundel ou† of ha†red of his library, I, who studied theology by clubbing 
priests †ha† were †oo fa†. I killed Severinus of Sonkt Wendel ... why* Becouse he gathered herbs, 
I, who was on Monte Rebello, where we ate herbs and grasses without wondering about their 
properties. In truth, I could also kill the others, including our abbot: with the Pope or with the 
empire, he still belongs to my enemies, and I hove always ho†ed him, even when he fed me because I 
fed him. Is †ho† enough for you* Ah, no, you also want to know how I killed all those people. ... 
Why, I killed them ... let me see ... by calling up the infernal powers, with the help of a 
thousand legions brought under my command by the art that Salvatore taught me. To kill someone it 
is not necessary to strike: the Devil does it for you, if you know how to command the Devil.”

He gove the onlookers a sly glance, laughing. But by now it was the laughter of a madmon, even if, 
os William pointed out to me afterward, this madman was clever enough to drag Salvatore down with 
him also, to avenge his betrayal.

“And how could you command the Devil*” Bernard insisted, taking this delirium as a legitimate 
confession.

“You yourself know: it is impossible to traffic for so many years with the possessed ond not weor 
their habit! You yourself know, butcher of apostles! You take a black cat—isn't that it*—that does 
not have even one white hair (you know this), and you bind his four paws, and then you take him at 
midnight to a crossroads and you cry in a loud voice: O great Lucifer, Emperor of Hell, I coll you 
and I introduce you into the body of my enemy just qs I now hold prisoner this cqt, qnd if you will 
bring my enemy to death, then the following night at midnight, in this same ploce, I will offer you 
this cat in sacrifice, and you will do what I command of you by the powers of the magic I now 
exercise according to the secret book of Saint Cyprian, in the name of all the coptains of the 
great legions of hell, Adramelch, Alqstor, and Azqzel, to whom now I pray, with qll their brothers. 
 ” His lip trembled, his eyes seemed
to bulge from their sockets, and he began to pray—or, rother, he seemed to be praying, but he 
addressed his implorations to all the chiefs of the infernal legions: “Abigor, pecca pro nobis  
Amon,
miserere nobis ... Samael, libera nos a bono ... Belial eleison  Focalor, in corrup†ionem meam 
in†ende
Haborym, damnomus dominum ... Zaebos, anum meum aperies  Leonard, osperge me spermate tuo et
inquinabor. ”
“Stop, stop!” everyone in the hall cried, making the sign of the cross. “O Lord, have mercy on us 
all!”

The cellarer was now silent. When he hqd uttered the names of all these devils, he fell face down, 
a whitish saliva drooling from his twisted mouth and the clenched rows of his teeth. His hands, 
though tormented by his chains, opened and closed convulsively, his feet kicked the air in 
irregular fits.
Seeing me gripped by a trembling of horror, William put his hand on my head and clasped me almost 
at the nape, pressing it, which calmed me ogain. “You see*” he said to me. “Under torture or the 
threat of torture, a man says not only what he has done but what he would have liked to do even if 
he didn't know it. Remigio now wants death with all his soul.”


The archers led the cellqrer qway, still in convulsions. Bernard, gathered his papers. Then he 
looked hord at those present, motionless, but in great agitation.

"The in†erroga†ion is over. The accused, guiI†y by his own confession, will be †aken †o Avignon, 
where the final triql will be held, qs a scrupulous safeguard of truth and justice, and only after 
that formal
†riaI will he be burned. He no longer belongs †o you, Abo, nor does he belong any longer †o me, who 
am only the humble instrument of the truth. The fulfillment of justice will take place elsewhere; 
the shepherds have done their duty, now the dogs must separate the infected sheep from the flock 
and purify i† wi†h fire. The wretched episode †ha† has seen †his man commi† such ferocious crimes 
is ended. Now may the abbey live in peace. But the world“—here he raised his voice and addressed 
the group of envoys—"the world has still not found peace. The world is riven by heresy, which finds 
refuge even in †he halls of imperial palaces! Le† my brothers remember †his: a cingulum dioboli 
binds Dolcino's perverse sectarians to the honored masters of the chapter of Perugia. We must not 
forget: in the eyes of God the savings of the wretch we have just handed over to justice are no 
different from those of the masters who feast at the table of the excommunicated German of Bavaria. 
The source of the heretics' wickedness springs from many preachings, even respected, still 
unpunished. Hard passion and humble Calvctry are the lot of him who has been cctlled by God, like 
my own sinful person, to distinguish the viper of heresy wherever it may nest. But in carrying out 
this holy task, we learn that he who openly practices heresy is not the only kind of heretic. 
Heresy's supporters can be distinguished by five indicators. First, there are those who visit 
heretics secretly when they are in prison: second, those who lament their capture and hqve been 
their intimate friends (it is, in fact, unlikely that one who has spent much time with a heretic 
remains ignorant of his activity); third, those who declare the heretics have been unjustly 
condemned, even when their guilt has been proved; fourth, those who look askance and criticize 
those who persecute heretics and preach against them successfully, and this can be discovered from 
the eyes, nose, the expression they try to conceal, showing hatred towctrd those for whom they feel 
bitterness and love toward those whose misfortune so grieves them; the fifth sign, finally, is the 
fact that they collect the charred bones of burned heretics and make them an object of veneration.  
But I attach great value also to a sixth sign, and I
consider open friends of heretics the authors of those books where (even if they do not openly 
offend orthodoxy) the heretics hctve found the premises with which to syllogize in their perverse 
wcty."
As he spoke, he was looking at Ubertino. The whole French legation understood exactly what Bernard 
meant. By now the meeting had failed, and no one would dare repeat the discussion of that morning, 
knowing that every word would be weighed in the light of these latest, disastrous events. If 
Bernard had been sent by the Pope to prevent a reconciliation between the two groups, he had 
succeeded.

VESPERS
In which Ubertino tokes flight, genno begins to observe the laws, and William mokes some 
reflections on the various types of lust encountered that day.

As the monks slowly emerged from the chapter house, Michael came over to Williom, and then both of 
them were joined by Ubertino. Together we oll went out into the open, to confer in the cloister 
under cover of the fog, which showed no sign of thinning out. Indeed, it was made even thicker by 
the shadows.



"I don't think it necessary to comment on what has happened,“ William said. "Bernord has defeated 
us. Don't ask me whether that imbecile Dolcinian is really guilty of all those crimes. As far as I 
can tell, he isn't, not at all. The fact is, we are back where we started. John wants you alone in 
Avignon, Michael, and this meeting hasn‘t given you the guarantees we were looking for. On the 
contrary, it has given you an idea of how every word of yours, up †here, could be dis†or†ed. Whence 
we mus† deduce, i† seems †o me, that you should not go.”

Michael shook his head. "I will go, on the contrary. I do not want a schism. You, William, spoke 
very clearly today, and you said what you would like. Well, that is not what I want, and I realize 
that the decisions of the Perugia chapter have been used by the imperial theologians beyond our 
intentions. I want the Franciscan order to be accepted by the Pope with its ideal of poverty. And 
the Pope must understand that unless the order confirms the ideal of poverty, it will never be 
possible for it to recover the heretical offshoots. I w'!!9 IO Avignon, and if necessary I will 
make an act of submission
to John. I will compromise on everything except the principle of poverty.“

Ubertino spoke up. "You know you are risking your life*”

“So be it," Michael answered. “Better than risking my soul."

He did seriously risk his life, and if John was right (as I still do not believe), Michael also 
lost his soul. As everyone knows by now, Michael wen† to the Pope a week after the events I am 
narrating. He held out against him for four months, until in April of the following year John 
convened a consistory in which he called Michael a madman, a reckless, stubborn, tyrannical 
fomented of heresy, a viper nourished in the very bosom of the church. And one might think that, 
according to his way of seeing things, John was right, becouse during those four months Michael had 
become q friend of my master's friend, the other William, the one from Occam, and had come to share 
his ideas—more extreme, bu† not very different from those my master shared with Marsilius and had 
expounded that morning. The life of these dissidents become precarious in Avignon, and at the end 
of May, Michael, William of Occam, Bonagratia of Bergctmo, Francis of Ascoli, and Henri de Tqlheim 
took flight, pursued, by the Pope's men to Nice, then Toulon, Marseilles, and Aigues-Mortes, where 
they were overtaken by Cardinal Pierre de Arrablay, who tried to persuade them to go back but was 
unable to overcome their resistance, their hatred of the Pontiff, their fear. In June they reached 
Pisa, where they were received in triumph by the imperial forces, and in the following months 
Michael was to denounce John publicly. Too late, by then. The Emperor's fortunes were ebbing; from 
AVi9non John was plotting to give the Minorites a new superior general, and he finally achieved 
victory. Michael would have done be††er no† †o decide †ha† day †o go †o †he Pope: he could have led 
†he Minorites’ resistance more closely, without wasting so many months in his enemy's power, 
weakening his own position.  gut
perhctps divine omnipo†ence had so ordained †hings—nor do I know now who ctmon9†hem all wets in †he 
right. After so mony years even the fire of passion dies, and with it what was believed the light 
of the truth. Who of us is able to say now whether Hector or Achilles was right, Agamemnon or 
Priam, when they fought over the beauty of a woman who is now dust and ashes*

But I am straying into melancholy digressions. I must tell instead of the end of that sad 
conversation. Michael had made up his mind, and there was no way of convincing him to desist. But 
another problem arose, and William announced it without mincing words: Ubertino himself was no 
longer safe. The


words Bernard had addressed to him, the hatred the Pope now felt toward him, the fqct thqt, whereas 
Michoel still represented o power with which to negotiote, Ubertino was a porty unto himself at 
this point

“John wants Michael at court and Ubertino in hell. If I know Bernard, before tomorrow is over, with 
the complicity of the fog, Ubertino will hove been killed. And if anyone asks who did it, the abbey 
can easily bear another crime, and they will say it was done by devils summoned by Remigio and his 
black ca†s, or by some surviving Dolcinian s†iII lurking inside †hese walls.  ”
Ubertino was worried. “Then—*” he asked.
“Then,“ William said, “go and speak with the abbot. Ask him for a mount, some provisions, and a 
letter to some distant abbey, beyond the Alps. And take advantage of the darkness and the fog to 
leave at once."
“But are the archers not still guarding the gates*“
"The abbey has other exits, and the abbo† knows them. A servan† has only to be waiting for you a† 
one of the lower curves with a horse; and after slipping through some passage in the walls, you 
will have only to go through a stretch of woods. You must act immediately, before Bernard recovers 
from the ecstasy of his triumph. I must concern myself with something else. I hqd two missions: one 
has failed, a† leas† †he o†her mus† succeed. I won† †o ge† my hands on a book, and on a mon. If all 
goes well, you will be out of here before I seek you again. So farewell, then." He opened his arms. 
Moved, Ubertino held him in a close embrace: “Farewell, William. You are a mad and arrogant 
Englishman, but you have a great heart. Will we meet agoin*“
"We will meet ogain,“ William assured him. "God will wish it.”
God, however, did not wish it. As I have already said, Ubertino died, mysteriously killed, two 
years later. A hard and adventurous life, the life of this mettlesome and qrdent old man. Perhaps 
he was not a saint, but I hope God rewarded his adamantine certainty of being one. The older I grow 
and the more I abandon myself to God's will, the less I value intelligence that wants to know and 
will that wants to do; and as the only element of salvation I recognize faith, which can wait 
patiently, without asking †oo mony questions. And Ubertino surely had grea† fai†h in †he blood and 
agony of our Lord Crucified.
Perhaps I was thinking these things even then, and the old mystic realized it, or guessed that I 
would
†hink †hem one day. He smiled a† me sweetly and embraced me, wi†hou† †he in†ensi†y wi†h which he 
had sometimes gripped me in the preceding dqys. He embraced me as a grandfather embraces his 
grandson, and in the same spirit I returned the embrace. Then he went off with Michael to seek the 
abbo†.
“And now*“ I asked William. “And now, back to our crimes.“


“Master,” I said, “today mony things happened, grave things for Christianity, and our mission has 
failed. And yet you seem more interested in solving this mystery than in the conflict between the 
Pope and the Emperor.”

“Mqdmen and children always speqk the truth, Adso. It may be that, as imperial adviser, my friend 
Marsilius is better than I, but as inquisitor I am better. Even better than Bernard Gui, God 
forgive me. Because Bernard is interested, not in discovering the guilty, but in burning the 
accused. And I, on
†he contrary, find †he mos† joyful deligh† in unraveling a nice, complicated kno†. And i† mus† also 
be because, at a time when as philosopher, I doubt the world has an order, I am consoled to 
discover, if not an order, at least a series of connections in small areas of the world's affairs. 
Finally, there is probably another reason: in this story things greater and more important than the 
battle between John and Louis may be a† stake.  ”
“But it is a story of theft and ven9eanceamong monks of scant virtue!” I cried, dubiously.
“Because of a forbidden book, Adso. A forbidden book!” William replied.

By now the monks were heading for supper. Our meal was half over when Michael of Cesena sat down
beside us and †oId us Ubertino had lef†. William heaved a sigh of relief.

At the end of the meal, we avoided the abbot, who was conversing with Bernard, and noted Benno, who 
greeted us with a half smile as he tried to follow the door. William overtook him and forced him to 
follow us to a corner of the kitchen.
“Benno,” William osked him, “where is the book*”

“Wha† book*”

“Benno, neither of us is a fool. I om speaking of the book we were hunting for todoy in Severinus's 
laboratory, which I did not recognize. But you recognized it very well and went back to get it. ”
“What makes you think I took it*”
“I think you did, and you think the same. Where is it*”
“I cannot tell.”
“Benno, if you refuse to tell me, I will speok with the abbot.”
“I cannot tell by order of the abbot,” Benno said, with a virtuous air. “Todoy, after we saw each 
other, something happened that you should know about. On Berengar's death there was no assistant 
librarian. This afternoon Malachi proposed me for the position. Just half an hour ago the abbot 
agreed, and tomorrow morning, I hope, I will be initiated into the secrets of the library. True, I 
did take the book this morning, and I hid it in the pallet in my cell without even looking at it, 
because I knew Malachi was keeping an eye on me. Eventually Malachi made me the proposal I told 
you. And then I did what an assis†an† librarian mus† do: I handed †he book over †o him.”



I could not refrain from speaking out, and violently.

“But, Benno, yesterday and the day before you ... you said you were burning with the curiosity to 
know, you didn't wqnt the library to conceal mysteries any longer, you said a scholar must know. 
..”

Benno was silent, blushing; but William stopped me: “Adso, a few hours ago Benno joined the other 
side. Now he is the guardian of those secrets he wanted to know, and while he guards them he will 
hove all the time he wants to leorn them.”
“But the others*” I asked. “Benno was speaking also in the name of all men of learning!” “Before,” 
William said. And he drew me away, leaving Benno the prey of confusion.
“Benno,” William then said to me, “is the victim of a great lust, which is not that of Berengar or 
that of the cellarer. Like mony scholars, he has a lust for knowledge. Knowledge for its own sake. 
Barred from a part of this knowledge, he wanted to seize it. Now he has it. Malachi knew his man: 
he used the bes† means †o recover †he book and seal Benno's lips. You will ask me wha† is †he good 
of controlling such a hoard of learning if one has agreed not to put it at the disposal of everyone 
else. But this is exactly why I speak of lust. Roger Bacon's thirst for knowledge was not lust: he 
wanted to employ his learning to make God's people happier, and so he did not seek knowledge for 
its own sake. Benno's is merely insatiable curiosity, intellectual pride, another way for a monk to 
transform and allay the desires of his loins, or the ardor that makes another man a warrior of the 
faith or of heresy. There is lust not only of the flesh. Bernard Gui is lustful; his is a distorted 
lust for justice that becomes identified with a lust for power. Our holy and no longer Roman 
Pontiff lusts for riches. And the cellarer as a youth hctd a lust to testify and transform and do 
penance, and then a lust for deqth. And Benno‘s lust is for books. Like all lusts, including thot 
of Onan, who spilled his seed on the ground, it is sterile and has nothing to do with love, not 
even carnal love.  ”

“I know,” I murmured, despite myself. William pretended not to heqr. Continuing his observations, 
he soid, “True love wan†s †he good of †he beloved.”

“Can i† be †ha† Benno wan†s †he good of his books (and now †hey are also his) and †hinks †heir good 
lies in their being kept far from grasping hands*” I osked.

“The good of a book lies in its being read. A book is made up of signs that speak of other signs, 
which in their turn speak of things. Without an eye to read them, a book contains signs that 
produce no concepts: therefore i† is dumb. This library was perhaps born †o save †he books i† 
houses, bu† now i† lives to bury them. This is why it has become a sink of iniquity. The cellqrer 
says he betrayed. So has Benno. He has betrayed. Oh, what a nasty day, my good Adso! Full of blood 
and ruination. I have had enough of this day. Let us also go to compline, and then to bed.”

Coming out of the kitchen, we encountered Aymaro. He asked us whether the rumor going around was 
true, that Malachi had proposed Benno os his assistant. We could only confirm it.


“Our Malachi has accomplished many fine things today,” Aymaro said, with his usual sneer of 
contempt and indulgence. If justice existed, the Devil would come and take him this very night.“

COMPLINE
In which a sermon is heard about the coming of the Antichrist, and Adso discovers the power of 
proper names.

Vespers had been sung in a confused fashion while the interrogation of the cellarer was still under 
way, with the curious novices escaping their master's control to observe through windows and crocks 
what was going on in the chapter hall. Now the whole community was to pray for the good soul of 
Severinus. Everyone expected the abbot to speak, and wondered what he would say. But instead, after 
the ritual homily of Saint Gregory, the responsory, and the three prescribed psalms, the abbot did 
step into the pulpit, but only to say he would remain silent this evening. Too many calamities had 
befallen the abbey, he said, to allow even the spiritual father to speak in a tone of reproach and 
admonition. Everyone, wi†h no exceptions, should now mctke ct s†ric† exctminq†ion of conscience. 
Bu† since it was necessary for someone to speak, he suggested the admonition should come from the 
oldest of their number, now close to death, the brother who was the least involved of all in the 
terrestrial passions that had generated so many evils. By right of age Alinardo of Grottaferrata 
should speak, but all knew the fragile condition of the venerable brother's health. Immediately 
ctfter Alinardo, in †he order established by †he inevitable progress of †ime, come Jorge. And †he 
abbo† now called upon him.

We heard a murmuring from the section of the stalls where Aymoro and the other Italians usually 
sat. I suspected the abbot hctd entrusted the sermon to Jorge without discussing the mcttter with 
Alinardo. My mas†er pointed ou† †o me, in a whisper, †ho† †he abbo†’s decision no† †o speak had 
been wise, because whatever he might have said would have been judged by Bernard and the other 
Avignonese present. Old Jorge, on the other hand, would confine himself to his usual mystical 
prophecies, and the Avignonese would not qttach much importance to them. “But I will,” William 
added, “because I don‘† believe Jorge agreed, and perhaps asked, to speak wi†hou† a very precise 
purpose.”

Jorge climbed in†o †he pulpi†, wi†h someone's help. His face was illuminated by †he †ripod, which 
alone lighted the nave. The glow of the flame underlined the darkness shrouding his eyes, which 
seemed two black holes.

“Mos† beloved brothers,” he began, “and all of our gues†s, mos† dear †o us. If you care †o Iis†en 
†o †his poor old man ... The four deaths thot have afflicted our abbey—not to mention the sins, 
remote and recent, of the most abject ctmong the living—ctre not, as you know, to be attributed to 
the severity of nature, which, implacable in its rhythms, ordains our earthly day, from cradle to 
grave. All of you no doubt believe that, though you have been overwhelmed with grief, these sad 
events have not involved your soul, because all of you, save one, are innocent, and when this one 
has been punished, while you will, to be sure, continue to mourn the absence of those who hove 
gone, you will not have to clear yourselves of any charge before the tribunal of God. So you 
believe. Madmen!” he shouted in an awful voice. “Madmen and presumptuous fools that you are! He who 
has killed will bear before God the burden of his guil†, bu† only because he agreed †o become †he 
vehicle of †he decrees of God. Jus† as


it was necessary for someone to betray Jesus in order for the mystery of redemption to be 
accomplished, yet the Lord sanctioned damnation and vituperation for the one who betrayed him. Thus 
someone has sinned in †hese days, bringing dea†h and ruina†ion, bu† I say †o you †ha† †his 
ruina†ion was, if no† desired, a† leas† permi††ed by God for †he humbling of our pride!“

He was silen†, ond †urned his blonk gaze on †he solemn assembly as if his eyes could perceive i†s 
emotions, as in fact with his ear he savored the silence and consternation.

“In this community,” he went on, "for some time the serpent of pride has been coiled. But what 
pride* The pride of power, in a monastery isolated from the world* No, certainly not. The pride of 
wealth* My brothers, before †he known world echoed wi†h long debates abou† poverty and ownership, 
from †he days of our founder, we, even when we had everything, have never had anything, our one 
true wealth being the observation of the Rule, prayer, and work. But of our work, the work of our 
order and in particular the work of this monastery, a part—indeed, the substance—is study, and the 
preservation of knowledge. Preservation of, I say, not search for, because the property of 
knowledge, as a divine thing, is that it is complete and has been defined since the beginning, in 
the perfection of the Word which expresses itself to itself. Preservation, I say, and not search, 
becctuse it is a property of knowledge, as a human thing, that it has been defined and completed 
over the course of the centuries, from the preaching of the prophets to the interpretation of the 
fathers of the church. There is no progress, no revolution of ages, in the history of knowledge, 
but at most a continuous and sublime recqpitulation. Humqn history proceeds with a motion that 
cannot be arrested, from the creation through the redemption, toward the return of Christ 
triumphant, who will appear seated on a cloud to judge the quick and the dead; but human and divine 
knowledge does not follow this path: steady as a fort that does not cede, it allows us, when we are 
humble and alert to its voice, to follow, to predict this path, but it is not touched by the path. 
I am He who is, soid the God of the Jews. I am the way, the truth, and the life, said our Lord. 
“There you hctve it: knowledge is nothing but the awed comment on these two truths. Everything else 
that has been soid was uttered by the prophets, by the evangelists, by , the fathers and the 
doctors, to make these two sayings clearer. And sometimes an apposite comment come also from the 
pagans, who were ignorant of them, and their words have been taken into the Christian tradition. 
But beyond thot there is nothing further to say. There is only to continue medi†a†ion, †o gloss, 
preserve. This was and should be †he office of our abbey wi†h i†s splendid library—nothing else. It 
is said that an Oriental caliph one day set fire to the library of a famous and glorious and proud 
city, and that, as those thousands of volumes were burning, he said that they could and should 
disappear: either they were repeating what the Koran already said, and therefore they were useless, 
or else they contrctdicted that book sacred to the infidels, and therefore they were harmful: The 
doctors of the church, and we along with them, did not reason in this way. Everything that involves 
commentary and clarification of Scripture must be preserved, because it enhances the glory of the 
divine writings; what contradicts must not be destroyed, because only if we preserve it can it be 
contradicted in its turn by those who can do so qnd are so charged, in the ways and times †ha† the 
Lord chooses. Hence the responsibility of our order through the centuries, and the burden of our 
abbey today: proud of the truth we proclaim, humble and prudent in preserving those words hostile 
to the truth, without allowing ourselves to be soiled by them. Now, my brothers, what is the sin of 
pride thot can tempt a scholar-monk* Thot of considering as his task not preserving but seeking 
some information not yet vouchsafed mankind, as if the last word had not already resounded in the 
words of the last angel who speaks in the last book of Scripture: 'For I testify unto every man 
that heareth the words of the prophecy of this book. If any man shall add unto


these things, God shqll add unto him the plagues that are written in this book: and if any man 
shall
†ake away from †he words of †he book of †his prophecy, God shall †ake away his par† ou† of †he book 
of life, and out of the holy city, and from the things which are written in this book.’ There ... 
does it not seem to you, my unfortunate brothers, that these words only adumbrate what has recently 
hctppened within these walls, whereas what hcts happened within these wctlls adumbrates only the 
same vicissitude as that afflicting the century in which we live, determined in word and in deed, 
in cities as in castles, in proud universities and cathedral churches, to seek anxiously to 
discover new codicils to the words of the truth, distorting the meaning of that truth already rich 
in all the scholia, and requiring only fearless defense and not foolish increment* This is the 
pride that lurked and is still lurking within these walls: and I say to him who has labored and 
labors to break the seals of the books thot are not his to see, that it is this pride the Lord 
wanted to punish and will continue to punish if it is not brought down and does not humble itself, 
for the Lord has no difficulty in finding, always and still, thanks to our fragility, the 
instruments of His vengeance.”

"Did you hear that, Adso*” William murmured to me. "The old man knows more thon he is saying. 
Whether or not he had a hand in this business, he knows, and is warning, that if certain curious 
monks continue vioIq†ing †he library, †he abbey will no† regain i†s peace.”
Jorge, after a long pause, now resumed speaking.

"Bu† who, finally, is †he very symbol of †his pride, of whom †he proud are †he illus†ra†ion and 
messengers, the accomplices and stondard-bearers* Who in truth has acted and is perhaps acting also 
inside these walls, so as to warn us that the time is at hand—and to console us, because if the 
time is a† hand, †he sufferings will surely be intolerable, bu† no† infinite, since †he grea† cycle 
of †his universe is about to be fulfilled* Oh, you have all understood very well, and you fear to 
utter the name, for it is also yours and you are qfrqid of it, but though you have fear, I shqll 
have none, qnd I will say this nome in o loud voice so that your viscero moy twist in fright and 
your teeth chotter and cut off your tongue, and the chill that forms in your blood make a dark veil 
descend over your eyes. .. He is the foul beast, he is the Antichrist!“

He paused for a long time. The listeners seemed dead. The only moving thing in the whole church was 
the flame in the tripod, but even the shadows it formed seemed to have frozen. The only sound, 
faint, was Jorge's gasping, as he wiped the sweat from his brow. Then Jorge went on.
“You would perhaps like to soy to me: No, he has not yet come; where are the signs of his coming* 
Fool who says this! Why, we have them before our eyes, day after day, in the great amphitheater of 
the world and in †he narrower image of †he abbey, †he premoni†ory ca†as†rophes.  I† has been said 
†ha†
when the moment is near, a foreign king will rise in the West, lord of immense deceits, atheist, 
killer of men, fraudulent, thirsting for gold, skilled in tricks, wicked, enemy and persecutor of 
the faithful, and in his time he will not hold silver dear but will esteem only gold! I know well, 
you who listen to me hasten now to make your calculations to see whether he of whom I speak 
resembles the Pope or the Emperor or †he King of France or whomever you will, so †ha† you will be 
able †o say: He is my enemy and I am on the right side! But I am not so ingenuous: I will not 
single out one mon for you. The Antichrist, when he comes, comes in all and for all, and, each is a 
part of him. He will be in the bands of brigands who sack cities and countryside, he will be in 
unforeseen signs in the heavens whereby suddenly rainbows will appear, horns and fires, while the 
moaning of voices will be heard and the sea


will boil. It has been said that men and animals will 9enerqtemonsters, but this means that heqrts 
will conceive ha†red and discord. Do no† look around you for a glimpse of †he animals of †he 
illuminations you so enjoy on parchments! It has been said that young wives not long wed will give 
birth to babes already able to speak perfectly, who will bring word that the time is at hand and 
will ask to be killed. But do not search the villages down below us, the too-wise babes have 
already been killed inside these
very walls! And like those babes of the prophecies, they had the appearance of men already old, and 
in the prophecy they were the quadruped children, and the ghosts, and the embryos that were to 
prophesy in the mothers' wombs uttering magic spells. And all has been written, do you know that* 
It has been written that many will be the agitations among those of rank, and among the peoples, 
the churches: that wicked shepherds will rise up, perverse, disdainful, greedy, pleasure-seeking, 
lovers of gain, enjoyers of idle speech, boastful, proud, avid, arrogant, plunged in lewdness, 
seekers of vainglory, enemies of the Gospel, ready to repudiate the strait gate, to despise the 
true word; and they will hate every path of piety, they will not repent their sins, and therefore 
will spread among all peoples disbelief, fraternal hatred, wickedness, hardness of heart, envy, 
indifference, robbery, drunkenness, intemperance, losciviousness, carnal pleasure, fornication, and 
all the other vices. Affliction will vanish, and humility, love of peace, poverty, compassion, the 
gift of tears.  Come, do you not recognize
yourselves, ctll of you here presen†, monks of †his abbey ctnd migh†y visitors from †he outside 
world*“
In the pause that followed a rustling was heard. It was Cardinal Bertrand wriggling on his bench. 
After all, I thought, Jorge was behaving like a great preacher, and as he lashed his brothers he 
was not sparing the guests, either. I would have given anything to know what was going through 
Bernard's mind at that moment, or the minds of the fat Avignonese.
"And it will be at this point, precisely this,“ Jorge thundered, "that the Antichrist will have his 
blasphemous apparition, ape as he wants to be of our Lord. In those times (which ore these) all 
kingdoms will be swept awcty, there will be famine and poverty, and poor harvests, and winters of 
exceptional severity. And †he children of †ha† †ime (which is †his) will no longer have anyone †o 
administer their goods and preserve food in their storerooms, and they will be harassed in the 
markets of buying and selling. Blessed, then, are those who will no longer live, or who, living, 
will be able to survive! Then will come the son of perdition, the enemy who boctsts and swells up, 
displaying many virtues to deceive the whole earth and to prevail over the just. Syria will fall 
and mourn her sons. Cilicia will raise her head until he who is called to judge her shall appear. 
The daughter of Babylon will rise from the throne of her splendor to drink from the cup of 
bitterness. Cappadocia, Lycia, and Lycaonio will bow down, for whole throngs will be destroyed in 
the corruption of their iniquity.
Barbctrian camps and war chctriots will appectr on all sides to occupy the lands. In Armenia, in 
Pontus, and in Bithynia youths will die by the sword, girl children will be taken prisoner, sons 
and daughters will commit incest. Pisidia, who boasts in her glory, will be laid prostrate, the 
sword will pass through the midst of Phoenicia, Judoea will be garbed in mourning and will prepare 
for the day of perdition brought on by her impurity. On every side will appear abomination and 
desolation, the Antichrist will defeqt the West and will destroy the trade routes; in his hand he 
will have sword and raging fire, and in violent fury the flame will burn: his strength will be 
blasphemy, his hand treachery, the right hand will be ruin, the left the bearer of darkness. These 
are the features that will mark him: his head will be of burning fire, his righ† eye will be 
bloodsho†, his tel† eye a feline green wi†h †wo pupils, and his eyebrows will be white, his lower 
lip swollen, his ankle weak, his feet big, his thumb crushed and elongated!”


“It seems his own portrait,” William whispered, chuckling. It was a very wicked remark, but I was 
grateful to him for it, because my hair was beginning to stand on end. I could barely stifle a 
laugh, my cheeks swelling as my clenched lips let out a puff. A sound that, in the silence 
following the old man's words, was clearly audible, but fortunately everyone thought someone was 
coughing, or weeping, or shuddering; and all of them were right.

“It is the moment,” Jorge was now saying, “when everything will fall into lawlessness, sons will 
raise their hands against fathers, wives will plot against husbands, husbands will bring wives to 
law, masters will be inhuman to servants and servants will disobey their masters, there will be no 
more respect for the old, the young will demand to rule, work will seem a useless chore to all, 
everywhere songs will rise praising license, vice, dissolute liberty of behavior. And after that, 
rape, adultery, perjury, sins against nature will follow in a great wave, and disease, and 
soothsaying, and spells, and flying bodies will appear in the heavens, in the midst of the good 
Christians false prophets will rise, false apostles, corrupters, impostors, wizards, rapists, 
usurers, perjurers and falsifiers; the shepherds will turn into wolves, priests will lie, monks 
will desire things of this world, the poor will not hasten to the aid of their lords, the powerful 
will be without mercy, the just will bear witness to injustice. All cities will be shaken by 
ectrthquakes, there will be pestilence in every land, storm winds will uproot the ectrth, the 
fields will be contaminated, the sea will secrete black humors, new and strange wonders will take 
place upon the moon, the stars will abandon their courses, other stars—unknown—will furrow the sky, 
it will snow in summer, and in winter the heat will be intense. And the times of the end will have 
come, and the end of time. ... On the first day at the third hour in the firmament a great and 
powerful voice will be raised, a purple cloud will advance from the north, thunder and lightning 
will follow it, and on the earth a rain of blood will fall. On the second day the earth will be 
uprooted from its seat and the smoke of a great fire will pass through the gates of the sky. On the 
third day the abysses of the earth will rumble from the four corners of the cosmos. The pinnacles 
of the firmament will open, the air will be filled with columns of smoke, qnd there will be the 
stench of sulphur until the tenth hour.
On the fourth day, early in the morning, the abyss will liquefy and emit explosions, and buildings 
will collapse. On the fifth day at the sixth hour the powers of light and the wheel of the sun will 
be destroyed, and there will be darkness over the earth till evening, and the stars and the moon 
will cease their office. On the sixth dcty qt the fourth hour the firmqment will split from east to 
west and the angels will be able to look down on the earth through the crack in the heavens and all 
those on earth will be able to see the angels looking down from heaven. Then all men will hide on 
the mountains to escape the gaze of the just angels. And on the seventh day Christ will arrive in 
the light of his Father. And there will then be the judgment of the just and their ascent, in the 
eternal bliss of
bodies and souls. But this is not the object of your meditation this evenin9, proUd brothers! It is 
not sinners who will see the dawn of the eighth day, when a sweet and tender voice will rise from 
the east, in the midst of the heavens, and that angel will be seen who commands all the other holy 
angels, and all the angels will advance together with him, seated on a chariot of clouds, filled 
with joy, speeding through the air, to set free the blessed who hqve believed, and qll together 
they will rejoice because
the destruction of this world will have been consummated! But this is not to moke us rejoice 
proudly this evening! We will meditate instead on the words the Lord will utter to drive from him 
those who have not earned salvation: Far from me, ye accursed, into the eternal fire that has been 
prepared for you by the Devil and his ministers) You yourselves have earned it, and now enjoy it! 
Go ye from me, descending into the eternal darkness and into the unquenchable fire! I made you and 
you became followers of another! You became servants of another lord, go and dwell with him in the 
darkness, with him, the serpent who never rests, amid the gnashing of teeth! I gave you ears to 
hear the Scripture


and you listened to the words of pagans! I formed ct mouth for you to 9lorifyGod, and you used it 
for the lies of poets and the riddles of buffoons! I love you eyes to see the light of my precepts, 
and you used them to peer into the darkness! I am a humane judge, but a just one. To each I shall 
give what he
deserves. I would have mercy on you, but I find no oil in your jars. I would be impelled to take 
pity, but your lamps are not cleaned. Go from me. ... Thus will speak the Lord. And they ... and 
perhaps we ... will descend into the eternal torment. In the name of the Father, of the Son, and of 
the Holy Ghost.”

"Amen,” all replied, wi†h one voice.

In a line, without a murmur, the monks went off to their pallets. Feeling no desire to speak with 
one another, the Minorites ond the Pope‘s men disappeared, longing for solitude and rest. My heart 
was heavy.

"To bed, Adso," William said to me, climbing the stairs of the pilgrims' hospice. “This is not a 
night for roaming abou†. Bernard Gui migh† have the idea of heralding the end of the world by 
beginning with our carcasses. Tomorrow we must try to be present at matins, because immediately 
afterward Michael and the other Minorites will lectve.”
“Will Bernard leave, too, with his prisoners*“ I asked in a faint voice.

"Surely he has nothing more to do here. He will want to precede Michael to Avignon, but in such a 
way thot Michael's arrival coincides with the trial of the cellarer, a Minorite, heretic, and 
murderer. The pyre of the cellarer will illuminate, like a propitiatory torch, Michael's first 
meeting with the Pope.“

“And what will become of Salvatore and ... the girl*“

"Salvatore will go with the cellarer, because he will have to testify ot the trial. Perhops in 
exchange for this service Bernard will grant him his life. He may allow him to escape and then have 
him killed, or he may reolly let him go, because o man like Salvatore is of no interest to a man 
like Bernard. Who knows* Perhaps Salvqtore will end up q cutthroat bandit in some forest of 
Lqnguedoc. “
"And the girl*"

“I told you: she is burnt flesh. But she will be burned beforehand, along the way, to the 
edification of some Catharist village along the coqst. I have heard it said that Bernard is to meet 
his colleague Jacques Fournier (remember †ha† name: for †he presen† he is burning Albigensians, bu† 
he has higher ambitions), and a beautiful witch to throw on the fire will increase the prestige and 
the fame of both.

"But can nothing be done to save them*“ I cried. "Can't the abbot intervene*”

"For whom* For the cellarer, a confessed criminal* For a wretch like Salvatore* Or are you thinking 
of the girl*”

“What if I were*” I made bold to say. ’After all, of the three she is the only truly innocent one: 
you know she is not a witch. ”



“And do you believe that the abbot, after what has happened, wants to risk for a witch what little 
prestige he has left*”

“But he assumed the responsibility for Ubertino's escape!”

“Ubertino was one of his monks and was not accused of anything. Besides, what nonsense are you 
saying* Ubertino is an important man; Bernard could have struck him only from behind.”

“So the cellarer was right: the simple folk always pay for all, even for those who speak in their 
favor, even for those like Ubertino and Michael, who with their words of penance have driven the 
simple to rebel!” I was in such despair thot I did not consider that the girl was not even a 
Fraticello, seduced by Ubertino's mystical vision, but a peasant, poying for something that did not 
concern her.

“So it is,” William answered me sadly. “And if you are really seeking a glimmer of justice, I will 
tell you thot one day the big dogs, the Pope and the Emperor, in order to make peace, will pass 
over the corpses of the smctller dogs who bit one ctnother in their service. And Michael or 
Ubertino will be treated as your girl is being treated today.”

Now I know that William was prophesying—or, rather, syllogizing—on the basis of principles of 
natural philosophy. Bu† q† †ha† momen† his prophecies and his syllogisms did no† console me in †he 
leas†. The only sure thing was that the girl would be burned. And I felt responsible, because it 
was as if she would also expiate on the pyre the sin I had committed with her.

I burst shomefully into sobs and fled to my cell, where all through the night I chewed my pallet 
and moctned helplessly, for I was not even allowed—as they did in the romances of chivalry I had 
read with my companions a† Melk—†o lamen† and call ou† †he beloved's name.

This was the only earthly love of my life, and I could no†, then or ever after, coll †ho† love by 
name.


SIXTH DAY

MATINS

In which the princes sederunt, and Malachi slumps to the ground.

We went down to matins. That last part of the night, virtually the first part of the imminent new 
day, was s†iII foggy. As I crossed †he cloister †he dompness pene†ra†ed †o my bones, oching of†er 
my uneasy sleep. Although the church was cold, I knelt under those vaults with a sigh of relief, 
sheltered from the elements, comforted by the warmth of other bodies, and by prayer.

The chanting of the psalms had just begun when Williom pointed to the stalls opposite us: there was 
an empty place in between Jorge and Pacificus of Tivoli. It was the place of Malachi, who always 
sat beside †he blind man. Nor were we †he only ones who had noticed †he absence. On one side I 
caugh† a


worried glance from the abbot, all too well aware, surely, that those vacancies alwqys heralded 
grim news. And on the other I noticed thot old Jorge was unusually agitated. His face, os a rule so 
inscrutable because of those white, blank eyes, was plunged almost entirely in darkness; but his 
hands were nervous and restless. In fact, more than once he groped at the seat beside him, as if to 
see whether it wqs occupied. He repeated that gesture again and again, at regular intervals, as if 
hoping thot the absent mon would appear at any moment but fearing not to find him.

"Where can the librarian be*" I whispered to William.

"Malachi," William answered, "is by now the sole possessor of the book. If he is not guilty of the 
crimes, †hen he may no† know †he dangers †ha† book involves. "

There was nothing further to be said. We could only wait. And we waited: William and I, the abbot, 
who continued to stare at the empty place, and Jorge, who never stopped questioning the darkness 
with his hands.

When we reached the end of the office, the qbbot reminded monks and novices that it wqs necessary 
to prepare for the Christmas High Mass; therefore, as was the custom, the time before louds would 
be spent assaying the accord of the whole community in the performance of some chants prescribed 
for the occasion. That assembly of devout men was in effect trained as a single body, a single 
harmonious voice: through a process that had gone on for years, they acknowledged their 
unification, into a single soul, in their singing.
The abbot invited them to chant the "Sederunt”:
Sederunt principes et adversus me loquebctntur, iniqui
persecuti sunt me. Adiuvo me, Domine Deus meus, salvum me
foe propter magnom misericordiam tuam.

I asked myself whether †he obbo† had no† chosen deliberately †ha† gradual †o be chan†ed on †ho† 
particular night, the cry to God of the persecuted, imploring help against wicked princes. And 
there, the princes' envoys were still present at the service, to be reminded of how for centuries 
our order had been prompt to resist the persecution of the powerful, thanks to its special bond 
with the Lord, God of hosts. And indeed the beginning of the chant created an impression of great 
power.


On the first syllctble, a slow and solemn chorus began, dozens and dozens of voices, whose bass 
sound filled the naves and floated over our heads and yet seemed to rise from the heart of the 
earth. Nor did it break off, because as other voices began to weave, over that deep and continuing 
line, a series of vocalises and melismas, it—telluric—continued to dominate and did not cease for 
the whole time thctt it took a speaker to repeat twelve “Ave Maria“s in a slow ctnd cadenced voice. 
And as if released from every fear by †he confidence †ha† †he prolonged syllable, allegory of †he 
duration of e†erni†y, gave to those praying, the other voices (and especially the novices') on that 
rock-solid base raised cusps; columns, pinnacles of liquescent and underscored neumae. And as my 
heart was dazed with sweetness at the vibration of a climacus or a porrectus, a torculus or a 
salicus, those voices seemed to say to me that the soul (of those prayin9,and my own as I listened 
to them), unable to bear the exuberance of feeling, was lacerated through them to express joy, 
grief, praise, love, in an impetus of sweet sounds. Meanwhile, the obstinate insistence of the 
chthonian voices did not let up, as if the threatening presence of enemies, of the powerful who 
persecuted the people of the Lord, remained unresolved. Until that Neptunian boiling of a single 
note seemed overcome, or at least convinced and enfolded, by the rejoicing hallelujahs of those who 
opposed it, and all dissolved on a majestic and perfect chord and on a resupine neumo.
Once the "sederunt" had been uttered with a kind of stubborn difficulty, the "principes" rose in 
the air with grand and seraphic calm. I no longer asked myself who were the mighty who spoke 
against me (against us); the shadow of that seated, menacing ghost had dissolved, had disappeared.
And o†her ghos†s, I also believed, dissolved a† †ha† poin†, because on looking agoin a† Malachi‘s 
s†aIl, after my attention had been absorbed by the chant, I saw the figure of the librarian among 
the o†hers in prayer, as if he had never been missing. I looked a† William and saw a hin† of relief 
in his eyes, the some relief thot I noted from the distance in the eyes of the abbot. As for Jorge, 
he had once more extended his hands and, encountering his neighbor's body, had withdrawn them 
promptly. But I could not say what feelings stirred him.
Now the choir was festively chanting the "Adiuvo me," whose bright a swelled happily through the 
church, and even the u did not seem grim qs that to "sederunt," but full of holy vigor. The monks 
and
†he novices sang, as †he rule of chan† requires, wi†h body erec†, †hroo† free, heod looking up, †he 
book almost at shoulder height so they could read without having to lower their heads and thus 
causing the breath to come from the chest with less force. But it was still night, and though the 
trumpets of rejoicing blared, the haze of sleep trapped many of the singers, who, lost perhaps in 
the production of a long note, trusting the very wave of the chant, nodded ctt times, drawn by 
sleepiness. Then the wakers, even in that situation, explored the faces with a light, one by one, 
to bring them back to wakefulness of body and of soul.
So it was a waker who first noticed Malachi sway in a curious fashion, as if he had suddenly 
plunged back into the Cimmerian fog of a sleep that he had probably not enjoyed during the night. 
The waker went over to him with the lamp, illuminating his face and so attracting my attention. The 
librarian had no reaction. The man touched him, and Malachi slumped forward heavily. The waker 
barely had time to catch him before he fell.


The chanting slowed down, the voices died, there was brief bewilderment. William had jumped 
immediately from his seat ond rushed to the place where Pacificus of Tivoli ond the waker were now 
laying Malachi on the ground, unconscious.

We reached †hem ctlmos† a† †he same †ime as †he abbo†, and in †he ligh† of †he lctmp we saw †he 
poor man's face. I have already described Malachi's countenance, but that night, in that glow, it 
was the very image of death: the sharp nose, the hollow eyes, the sunken temples, the white, 
wrinkled ears with lobes turned outward, the skin of the face now rigid, taut, and dry; the color 
of the cheeks yellowish and suffused with a dark shadow. The eyes were still open and a labored 
breathing escaped those parched lips. He opened his mouth, and as I stooped behind William, who had 
bent over him, I saw a now blackish tongue stir within the cloister of his teeth. William, his arm 
around Malachi‘s shoulders, raised him, wiping away with his free hand a film of sweat that blanche 
his brow. Malachi felt a touch, a presence: he stared straight ohead, surely not seeing, certainly 
not recognizing who was before him. He raised a trembling hand, grasped William by †he chest, 
drawing his face down un†iI
they almost touched, then faintly and hoarsely he uttered some words: “He told me ... truly.  It 
had
the power of a thousand scorpions. ”

“Who told you*” William asked him. “Who*”

Malachi tried again to speak. But he was seized by a great trembling and his head fell backward. 
His face lost all color, all semblance of life. He was dead.

William s†ood up. He noticed †he abbo†- beside him, bu† did no† say a word †o him. Then, behind †he 
abbo†, he saw Bernard Gui.

“My lord Bernard,” William qsked, “who killed this man, after you so cleverly found and confined 
the murderers*”

“Do not ask me,” Bernard said. “I hove never said I had consigned to the law all the criminals 
loose in this qbbey. I would hqve done so gladly, had I been able.” He looked qt William. “But the 
others I now leave †o †he severity-or †he excessive indulgence of my lord abbo†.” The abbo† 
blanched and remained silent. Then Bernard left.

At that moment we heard a kind of whimpering, o choked sob. It was Jorge, on his kneeling bench, 
supported by a monk who must have described to him what hqd happened.

“I† will never end ” he said in a broken voice. “O Lord, forgive us all!”

William bent over the corpse for another moment. He grasped the wrists, turned the pqlms of the 
honds toward the light. The pads of the first three fingers of the right hand were darkened.

LAUDS

In which a new cellarer is chosen, but not a new librarian.



Was it time for lauds alrectdy* Was it earlier or later* From that point on I lost all temporctl 
sense. Perhaps hours went by, perhaps less, in which Malachi's body was laid out in church on a 
catafalque, while the brothers formed a semicircle around it. The abbot issued instructions for a 
prompt funeral. I heard him summon Benno and Nicholas of Morimondo. In less than a day, he said, 
the abbey had been deprived of its librarian and its cellarer. "You,” he said to Nicholas, "will 
take over the duties of Remigio. You know †he jobs of many, here in †he abbey. Name someone †o †oke 
your place in charge of the forges, and provide for today's immediate necessities in the kitchen, 
the refectory. You are excused from offices. Go.” Then to Benno he said, “Only yesterday evening 
you were named Malachi's assistant. Provide for the opening of the scriptorium and make sure no one 
goes up into the library alone.“ Shyly, Benno pointed out that he had not yet been initiated into 
the secrets of that place. The abbo† glared a† him sternly. "No one has said you will be. You see 
†ha† work goes on and is offered as a prayer for our dead brothers ... and for those who will yet 
die. Each monk will work only on the books already given him. Those who wish may consult the 
catalogue. Nothing else. You are excused from vespers, because at that hour you will lock up 
everything."

“But how will I come out*” Benno asked.
"Good question. I will lock the lower doors after supper. Go.”
He wen† ou† wi†h †hem, avoiding William, who wan†ed †o †aIk †o him. In †he choir, a li††Ie group 
remained: Alinardo, Pacificus of Tivoli, Aymaro of Alessandria, and Peter of Sant’AIbano. Aymaro 
was sneering.

"Let us thank the Lord,” he said. "With the German dead, there was the risk of having a new 
librarian even more barbarous.”
"Who do you think will be named in his place*“ William asked.
Peter of Sant’Albano smiled enigmatically. “After everything that hos happened these past few days,
†he problem is no longer †he librarian, bu† †he abbo†. "

"Hush," Pacificus said to him. And Alinardo, with his usual pensive look, said, “They will commit 
another injustice  as in my day. They must be stopped“

"Who*" William asked. Pacificus took him confidentially by the arm and led him a distance from the 
old man, toward the door.

“Alinardo ... as you know ... we love him very much. For us he represents the old tradition and the 
finest days of the abbey. ... But sometimes he speaks without knowing what he says. We are all 
worried about the new librarian. The man must be worthy, and mature, and wise.  That is all there 
is to it.“
"Must he know Greek*” William asked.
"And Arabic, as tradition has it: his office requires it. But there ore many among us with these 
gifts. I, if I may say so, and Peter, and Aymaro “



"Benno knows Greek."

“Benno is too young. I do not know why Malachi chose him as his assistant yesterday, but ...“ “Did 
Adelmo know Greek*”
“I believe not. No, surely not.”

“But Venantius knew it. And Berengar. Very well, I thank you.” We left, to go and get something in 
the kitchen.
“Why did you wont to find out who knew Greek*“ I osked.

"Because all those who die with blackened fingers know Greek. Therefore it would be well to expect 
the next corpse among those who know Greek. Including me. You ore safe.“

"And wha† do you †hink of Malachi's las† words*”

"You heard them. Scorpions. The fifth trumpet announces, among other thins, the coming of locusts 
that will torment men with a sting like q scorpion's. And Malachi informed us that someone had 
forewarned him.”

"The sixth trumpet,” I said, "announces horses with lions' heads from whose mouths come smoke and 
fire and brims†one, ridden by men covered wi†h breos†pIa†es †he color of fire, jacin†h, and 
brimstone.”

“Too many things. But the next crime might take place near the horse barn. We must keep an eye on 
it. And we must prepare ourselves for the seventh blast. Two more victims still. Who are the most 
likely candidates* If the objective is the secret of the finis Africqe, those who know it. And qs 
far qs I cqn tell, that means only the abbot. Unless the plot is something else. You heard them 
just now, scheming to depose the abbot, but Alinardo spoke in the plural. “

“The abbo† mus† be warned,“ I said.

“Of what* That they will kill him* I have no convincing evidence. I proceed as if the murderer and 
I think alike. But if he were pursuing another design* And if, especially, there were not a 
murderer*”

“What do you mectn*”

“I don't know exactly. But as I said to you, we must imagine all possible orders, and all 
disorders.“

PRIME
In which Nicholas tells many things as the crypt of the treasure is visited.



Nicholas of Morimondo, in his new position as cellarer, was giving orders to the cooks, and they 
were supplying him with information about the operation of the kitchen. William wanted to speak 
with him, but Nicholas asked us to wait a few moments, until he had to go down into the crypt of 
the treasure to supervise the polishing of the glqss cases, which was still his responsibility; 
there he would hqve more time for conversation.

A little later, he did in fact ask us to follow him. He entered the church, went behind the main 
altar (while the monks were setting up a catofalque in the nave, to keep vigil over Malachi's 
corpse), and led us down a little ladder. At its foot we found ourselves in a room with a very low 
vaulted ceilin9 supported by thick rough-stone columns. We were in the crypt where the riches of 
the abbey were stored, a place of which the abbot was very jealous and which he allowed to be 
opened only under exceptional circumstances and for very important visitors.

On every side were cases of different dimensions: in them, objects of wondrous beauty shone in the 
glow of the torches (lighted by two of Nicholas's trusted assistants). Gold vestments, golden 
crowns studded with gems, coffers of various metals engraved with figures, works in niello and 
ivory. In ecstasy, Nicholos showed us an evongeliarium whose binding disployed omozing enomel 
ploques composing a variegated unity of graduated compartments, outlined in gold filigree and fixed 
by precious stones in the guise of nails. He showed us a delicate aedicula with two columns of 
lapis lazuli and gold which framed an Entombment of Christ in fine silver bas-relief surmounted by 
a golden cross se† wi†h †hir†een diomonds ogains† a bockground of groiny onyx, while †he Ii††Ie 
pedimen† was scalloped with agate and rubies. Then I saw a chryselephantine diptych divided into 
five sections, with five scenes from the life of Christ, and in the center a mystical lamp composed 
of cells of gilded silver with glass paste, a single polychrome image on o ground of woxen 
whiteness.

Nicholas's face and gestures, as he illustroted these things for us, were radiant with pride. 
William praised the objects he had seen, then asked Nicholas what sort of man Malachi had been.

Nicholas moistened one finger and rubbed it over q crystal surface imperfectly polished, then 
answered with a holf smile, not looking William in the face: “As many said, Molachi seemed quite 
thoughtful, but on the contrary he was a very simple man. According to Alinardo, he was a fool.”

“Alinardo bears a grudge against someone for o remote event, when he was denied the honor of being 
librarian.”

"I, too, have heard talk of that, but it is an old story, dating back at least fifty years. When I 
arrived here the librarian was Rober† of Bobbio, and the old monks muttered abou† an injustice 
committed against Alinardo. Robert had an assistant, who later died, and Malachi, still very young, 
was appointed in his place. Many said thot Malachi was without merit, that though he claimed to 
know Greek and Arabic it was not true, he was only good at aping, copying manuscripts in those 
languages in fine calligraphy, without understanding what he was copying. Alinardo insinuated that 
Malachi had been put in that position to favor the schemes of his, Alinardo's, enemy. But I did not 
understand whom he meant. That is the whole story. There have always been whispers that Malachi 
protected the library like a guard dog, but with no knowledge of what he was guarding. For that 
matter, there was also whispering against Berengar, when Malachi chose him as assistant. They said 
that the young man was


no cleverer than his master, thctt he was only an intrigued. They also said—but you must have 
hectrd these rumors yourself by now—that there was a strange relationship between him and Malachi.  
Old
gossip. Then, as you know, there was talk about Berengar and Adelmo, and the young scribes said 
that Malachi silently suffered horrible jealousy. ... And then there was also murmuring about the 
ties between Malachi qnd Jorge. No, not m the sense you might believe—no one has ever murmured 
against Jorge's vir†ue!—bu† Malachi, as librarian, by †radi†ion should have chosen †he obbo† as his 
confessor, whereas all the other monks go to Jorge for confession (or to Alinardo, but the old man 
is by now almos† mindless)  Well, †hey said †ha† in spi†e of †his, †he librarian conferred †oo 
of†en wi†h Jorge,
as if the abbo† directed Malachi's soul bu† Jorge ruled his body, his actions, his work. Indeed, as 
you know yourself and have probably seen, if anyone wanted to know the location of an ancient, 
forgotten book, he did no† ask Malachi, bu† Jorge. Malachi kep† †he catalogue and wen† up in†o †he 
library, bu† Jorge knew what each title meant.  ”

“Why did J •9e know so many †hings abou† †he library*”
“He is the oldest, after Alinardo: he has been here since his youth. Jorge must be over eighty, and 
they sqy he has been blind at leqst forty years, perhaps longer. ”

“How did he become so learned, before his blindness*”

“Oh, †here are legends qbou† him. I† seems †ha† when he was only a boy he was already blessed by 
divine grace, and in his na†ive Castile he read †he books of †he Arabs and †he Greek doctors while 
s†iII a child. And then even after his blindness, even now, he sits for long hours in the library, 
he has others recite the catalogue to him and bring him books, and a novice reads aloud to him for 
hours and hours.”
“Now that Malachi and Berengar are dead, who is left who possesses the secrets of the library*”
“The abbot, and the abbot must now hand them on to Benno  if he chooses. ”
“Why do you say. ’if he chooses’*”
“Because Benno is young, and he was named assistant while Malachi was still alive: being assistant
librarian is differen† from being librarian. By †radi†ion, †he librarian Ia†er becomes abbo†. ”

“Ah, so that is it.  That is why the post of librarian is so coveted. But then Abo was once 
librarian*”

“No, no† Abo. His oppoin†men† †ook ploce before I arrived here: i† mus† be †hir†y years ago now. 
Before †hct†, Paul of Rimini wets abbo†, a curious man nbou† whom †hey †eII strange stories. I† 
seems he was a mos† voracious reader, he knew by hear† all †he books in †he library, bu† he had a 
strange infirmity: he was unable †o wri†e. They called him Abbas agraphicus.  He became abbo† when 
very
young: it was said he had the support of Algirdas of Cluny. ... But this is old monkish gossip. 
Anyway, Paul became obbo†, and Rober† of Bobbio †ook his place in †he library, bu† he was†ed awoy 
as an illness consumed him; †hey knew he would never be able †o govern †he abbey, and when Paul of 
Rimini disappeared ..”



“He died*”

“No, he disappeared, I do not know how. One day he went off on a journey and never came back; 
perhaps he was killed by thieves in the course of his travels. ... Anyway, when Paul disappeared, 
Robert could no† †ctke his place, ctnd †here were obscure pIo†s. Abo—i† is said—was the natural son 
of †he lord of †his dis†ric†. He grew up in †he abbey of Fossanovo; i† was said †ha† as a you†h he 
had †ended Soin† Thomas when he died there and had been in charge of carrying that great body down 
the stairs of a tower where the corpse could not pass.  That was his moment of glory, the malicious 
here murmured.
The fac† is, he was elected obbo†, even †hough he had no† been librarian, and he was ins†ruc†ed by 
someone, Robert I believe, in the mysteries of the library. Now you understand why I do not know 
whether the abbot will want to instruct Benno: it would be like naming him his successor, a 
heedless youth, a half-barbarian grammarian from the Far North, wha† could he know abou† this 
country, the abbey, its relations with the lords of the area*”
"But Malachi was not Italian, either, or Berengar, and yet both of them were appointed to the 
library.” “There is ct mysterious thing for you. The monks grumble thctt for the past half century 
or more the
abbey has been forsaking i†s †radi†ions. ... This is why, over fif†y years ago, perhaps earlier, 
Alinardo aspired to the position of librarian. The librarian had always been Italian—there is no 
scarcity of great minds in this land. And besides, you see ...“ Here Nicholas hesitated, as if 
reluctant to say what he was abou† †o say. “ .. you see, Mqlqchi and Berengar died, perhaps so †ha† 
†hey would no† become abbo†.”

He stirred, waved his hand before his face as if to dispel thoughts less than honest, then made the 
sign of the cross. “Whatever am I saying* You see, in this country shameful things hove been 
happening for mqny yeqrs, even in the monasteries, in the pqpal court, in the churches.  Conflicts 
to
goin power, accusations of heresy †o †ake a prebend from someone  How ugly! I am losing foi†h in 
†he
human race; I see plots and palace conspiracies on every side. That our abbey should come to this, 
a nest of vipers risen through occult magic in what had been a triumph of sainted members. Look: 
the past of this monastery!"

He pointed to the treasures scattered all around, and, leaving the crosses and other vessels, he 
took us to see the reliquaries, which represented the glory of this place.

“Look,” he said, "this is the tip of the spear that pierced the side of the Saviour!" We saw a 
golden box with a crystal lid, containing a purple cushion on which lay a piece of iron, triangular 
in shape, once corroded by rus† bu† now restored †o vivid splendor by long application of oils and 
waxes. Bu† †his was still nothing. For in another box, of silver studded with amethysts, its front 
panel transparent, I saw a piece of the venerated wood of the holy cross, brought to this abbey by 
Queen Helena herself, mother of the Emperor Constantine, after she had gone as a pilgrim to the 
holy places, excavated the hill of Golgotha and the holy sepulcher, and constructed a cathedral 
over it.

Then Nicholas showed us other things, and I could not describe them all, in their number and their 
rarity. There was, in a case of aquamarine, a nail of the cross. In an ampoule, lying on a cushion 
of little withered roses, there was a portion of the crown of thorns; and in another box, again on 
a blanket of dried flowers, a yellowed shred of the tablecloth from the last supper. And then there 
was the purse


of Sain† Ma††hew, of silver links; and in a cylinder, bound by a viole† ribbon ea†en by †ime and 
sealed with gold, a bone from Saint Anne's arm. I saw, wonder of wonders, under a glass bell, on a 
red cushion embroidered with pearls, a piece of the manger of Bethlehem, and a hand's length of the 
purple tunic of Saint John the Evangelist, two links of the chains that bound the ankles of the 
apostle Peter in Rome, the skull of Saint Adalbert, the sword of Pqint Stephen, a tibia of Paint 
Margaret, q finger of Saint Vitalis, a rib of Saint Sophia, the chin of Saint Eobanus, the upper 
part of Saint Chrysostom‘s shoulder blade, the engagement ring of Saint Joseph, a tooth of the 
Baptist, Moses‘s rod, a tattered scrap of very fine lace from the Virgin Mary's wedding dress.
And then other things that were not relics but still bore perennial witness to wonders and wondrous 
beings from dis†on† lands, brough† †o †he abbey by monks who had traveled †o †he far†hes† ends of 
the world: a stuffed basilisk and hydra, a unicorn's horn, on egg that a hermit had found inside 
another egg, a piece of the manna that had fed the Hebrews to the desert, a whale's tooth, a 
coconut, the scapula of an animal from before the Flood, an elephant‘s ivory tusk, the rib of a 
dolphin. And then more relics that I did not identify, whose reliquaries were perhaps more precious 
than they, and some (judging by the craftsmanship of their containers, of blackened silver) very 
ancient: an endless series of fragments, bone, cloth, wood, metql, glass. And phials with dark 
powders, one of which, I learned, contained †he charred remains of †he ci†y of Sodom, and another 
some mor†ar from †he walls of Jericho. All things, even the humblest, for which an emperor would 
have given more than a castle, and which represented a hoard not only of immense prestige but also 
of actual material wealth for the abbey that preserved them.

I continued wandering about, dumbfounded, for Nicholas had now stopped explaining the objects, each 
of which was described by a scroll anyway; and now I was free to roam virtually at random amid that 
display of priceless wonders, at times admiring things in full light, at times glimpsing them in 
semidctrkness, qs Nicholas's helpers moved to ctnother part of the crypt with their torches. I was 
fascinated by †hose yellowed bi†s of cartilage, mystical and revolting a† †he same †ime, 
†ransparen† and mysterious: by those shreds of clothing from some immemorial age, faded, 
threadbare, sometimes rolled up in a phial like a faded manuscript; by those crumbled materials 
mingling with the fabric †ha† was their bed, holy jetsctm of ct life once qnimal (and rcttionql) 
and now, imprisoned in constructions of crystal or of me†oI †ha† in †heir minuscule size mimed †he 
boldness of s†one cathedrals wi†h †owers and turrets, all seemed transformed into mineral substance 
as well. Is this, then, how the bodies of the saints, buried, await the resurrection of the flesh* 
From these shards would there be reconstructed those organisms thot in the splendor of the beatific 
vision, regaining their every natural sensitivity, would sense, as Pipernus wrote, even the minimas 
differentias odorum*

William stirred me from my meditations as he touched my shoulder. "I am going,“ he said. "I'm going 
up to the scriptorium. I hove yet something to consult. “

"Bu† i† will be impossible †o have any books,” I said. “Benno was given orders. “

"I have to re-examine only the books I was reading the other day; all are still in the scriptorium, 
on Venon†ius’s desk. You s†ay here, if you like. This cryp† is o beou†iful epitome of †he debates 
on poverty you have been following †hese pas† few days. And now you know why your brothers make 
mincemeat of one another as they aspire to the position of abbot.”


“But do you believe what Nicholas implied* Are the crimes connected with a conflict over the
investiture*”

“I've already told you that for the present I don't want to put hypotheses into words. Nicholas 
said many things. And some interested me. But now I am going to follow yet another trqil. Or 
perhaps the some, but from a different direction. And don‘t succumb too much to the spell of these 
cases. I hove seen many other fragments of the cross, in other churches. If all were genuine, our 
Lord‘s torment could no† have been on a couple of planks nailed †oge†her, bu† on an en†ire fores†.”
“Master!” I said, shocked.

“So it is, Adso. And there are even richer treasuries. Some time ago, in the cathedral of Cologne, 
I sow the skull of John the Baptist ot the age of twelve.”

“Really*” I excloimed, omazed. Then, seized by doub†, I added, “Bu† †he Bop†is† wos execu†ed a† a 
more advanced age!”

“The other skull must be in onother treasury,” Williom soid, with a grave face. I never understood 
when he was jesting. In my country, when you joke you say something and then you laugh very 
noisily, so everyone shares in the joke. But William laughed only when he said serious things, and 
remained very serious when he was presumably joking.

TERCE

In which Adso, listening to the “Dies irae,” has n dream, or vision, howsoever you may choose to 
define


William took his leave of Nicholas and went up to the scriptorium. By now I had seen my fill of the 
treasure and decided to go into the church and prqy for Malachi's soul. I had never loved that man, 
who frightened me; and I will not deny that for a long time I believed him guilty of oll the 
crimes. But now I had learned that he was perhaps a poor wretch, oppressed by unfulfilled passions, 
an earthenware vessel among vessels of iron, surly because bewildered, silent and evasive because 
conscious he had nothing to say. I felt o certain remorse toward him, and I thought that praying 
for his supernatural destiny might allay my feelings of guilt.

The church was now illuminated by a faint and livid glow, dominated by the poor man's corpse, and 
inhabited by the monotone murmur of the monks reciting the office of the dead.

In the monastery of Melk I had several times witnessed a brother's decease. It was not what I could 
call a happy occasion, but still it seemed to me serene, governed by calm and by a sense of 
rightness. The monks took turns in the dying man's cell, comforting him with good words, and each 
in his heart considered how †he dying man was for†una†e, because he was abou† †o conclude a 
virtuous life and would soon join †he choir of angels in †ha† bliss wi†hou† end. And a par† of †his 
serenity, †he odor of that pious envy, was conveyed to the dying man, who in the end died serenely. 
How different the deaths of the past few days! Finally I had seen at close hand how a victim of the 
diabolical scorpions


of the finis Africae died, and certainly Venantius and Berengar hqd also died like that, seeking 
relief in woter, their faces already wasted as Malachi's hod been.

I sa† a† †he back of †he church, huddled down †o comba† †he chill. As I fel† a bi† of warm†h, I 
moved my lips to join the chorus of the praying brothers. I followed them almost without being 
awctre of what my lips were saying, while my head nodded and my eyes wanted to close. Long minutes 
went by: I believe I fell asleep and woke up at least three or four times. Then the choir began to 
chant the “Dies irae.” ... The chanting affected me like a narcotic. I went completely to sleep. Or 
perhaps, rather than slumber, I fell into an exhausted, agitated doze, bent double, like an infant 
still in its' mother's womb. And in that fog of the soul, finding myself as if in a region not of 
this world, I had a vision, or dream, if you prefer to call it that.

I was descending some narrow steps into a low passage, as if I were entering the treasure crypt, 
but, continuin9 to descend, I arrived in a broader crypt, which was the kitchen of the Aedificium. 
It was certainly †he kitchen, bu† †here was a bus†Ie among no† only ovens and po†s, bu† also 
bellows and hammers, as if Nicholas's smiths had assembled there as well. Everything glowed red 
from the stoves and cctuldrons, and boiling po†s gave off s†ectm while huge bubbles rose †o †heir 
surfaces ctnd popped suddenly with a dull, repeated sound. The cooks turned spits in the air, as 
the novices, who had all gathered, leaped up to snatch the chickens and the other fowl impaled on 
those red-hot irons. But nearby the smiths hammered so powerfully that the whole air was deafened, 
and clouds of sparks rose from the anvils, mingling with those belching from the two ovens.

I could not understand whether I was in hell or in such a paradise as Salvatore might have 
conceived, dripping with juices and throbbing with sausages. But I had no time to wonder where I 
was, because in rushed a sworm of little men, dwarfs with huge pot-shoped heads: sweeping me away, 
they thrust me to the threshold of the refectory, forcing me to enter.

The hall was bedecked for a feast. Great tapestries and banners hung on the walls, but the images 
adorning them were not those usually displayed for the edification of the faithful or the 
celebration of the glories of kings. They seemed inspired, on the contrary, by Adelmo's 
marginalict, and they reproduced his less awful and more comical images: hares dancing around the 
tree of plenty, rivers filled with fish that flung themselves spontaneously into frying pans held 
out by monkeys dressed as cook-bishops, monsters with fat bellies skipping around steaming kettles.
In the center of the table wqs the abbot, in feast-day dress, with a great vestment of embroidered 
purple, holding his fork like a scepter. Beside him, Jorge drank from a great mug of wine, and 
Remigio, dressed like Bernard Gui, held a book shaped like a scorpion, virtuously reading the lives 
of the saints and passages from the Gospels, but they were stories about Jesus joking with the 
apostle, reminding him thqt he was a stone and on that shameless stone that rolled over the plain 
he would build his church, or the story of Saint Jerome commenting on the Bible and saying that God 
wanted to bore Jerusalem's behind. And at every sentence the cellarer read, Jorge laughed, pounded 
his fist on the
†abIe, and shouted, “You shall be †he nex† abbo†, by God's belly!” Those were his very words, may 
†he Lord forgive me.
At a merry signal from the abbot, the procession of virgins entered. It was a radiant line of 
richly dressed females, in whose midst I thought at first I could discern my mother: then I 
realized my


error, because it was certainly the maiden terrible cts an army with banners. Except that she wore 
a crown of white pearls on her head, a double strand, and two cascades of pearls fell on either 
side of her face, mingling with two other rows which hung on her bosom, and from each pearl hung a 
diamond as big as a plum. Further, from bo†h ears descended rows of blue pearls, which joined †o 
become a choker at the bqse of her neck, white and erect as a tower of Lebanon. The cloak was 
murex-colored, and in her hand she had a diamond-studded golden goblet in which I knew, I cannot 
say how, was contained the lethal unguent one day stolen from Severinus. This woman, fair as the 
dawn, was followed by other female forms. One was clothed in a white embroidered mantle over a dark 
dress adorned with a double stole of gold embroidered in wild flowers: the second wore a cloak of 
yellow damask on a pale-pink dress dotted with green leaves, and with two great spun squares in the 
form of a dark labyrinth; and the third had an emerald dress interwoven with little red animals, 
and she bore in her hands a white embroidered stole; I did not observe the clothing of the others, 
becouse I was trying to understand who they were, to be accompanying the maiden, who now resembled 
the Virgin Mary; and as if each bore in her hand a scroll, or cts if a scroll came from each 
woman‘s mouth, I knew they were Ruth, Sarah, Susanna, and other women of Scripture.
At this point the abbot cried, “Come on in, you whoresons!” and into the refectory came another 
ctrrcty of sacred personages, in austere and splendid dress, whom I recognized clearly; and in the 
center of the group was one seated on a throne who was our Lord but at the same time He was Adam, 
dressed in a purple cloak with a great diadem, red and white with rubies and pearls, holding the 
cloak on His shoulders, and on His head a crown similar to the maiden's, in His hand a larger 
goblet, brimming with pig's blood. O†her mos† holy personages of whom I will speak, all familiar †o 
me, surrounded him, along with a host of the King of France's archers, dressed either in green or 
in red, with a pale-emerald shield on which the monogram of Christ stood out. The chief of this 
band went to pay homage to the abbot, extending the goblet to him. At which point the abbot said, 
“Age primum et septimum de quatuor,” and qll chanted, “In Minibus Africae, amen.” Then all 
sederunt.
When the two facing hosts had thus dispersed, at an order from Abbot Solomon the tables began to be 
laid, James and Andrew brought a bale of hay, Adam settled himself in the center, Eve lay down on a 
leaf, Cain entered dragging a plow, Abel cqme with a pail to milk Brunellus, Noah made q triumphal 
entry rowing the ark, Abraham sat under a tree, Isaac lay on the gold altar of the church, Moses 
crouched on a stone, Daniel appeared on a catafalque in Malachi‘s arms, Tobias stretched out on a 
bed, Joseph threw himself on a bushel, Benjamin reclined on a sack, and there were others still, 
but here the vision grew confused. David stood on a mound, John on the floor, Pharaoh on the sand 
(naturally, I sqid to myself, but why*), Lazarus on the table, Jesus on the edge of the well, 
Zaccheus on the boughs of a tree, Matthew on a stool, Raab on stubble, Ruth on straw, Thecla on the 
window sill (from outside, Adelmo's pale face appeared, as he warned her it was possible to fall 
down, down the cliff), Susanna in the garden, Judas among the graves, Peter on the throne, James on 
a net, Elias on a saddle, Rachel on a bundle. And Paul the apostle, putting down his sword, 
listened to Esau complain, while job moaned on the dungheap and Rebecca rushed to his aid with a 
garment and Judith with a blanket, Hagar with a shroud, and some novices carried a large steaming 
pot from which leaped Venantius of Salvemec, all red, as he began †o dis†ribu†e pig's-blood 
puddings.
The refectory was now becoming more and more crowded, and all were eating at full tilt; Jonas 
brought some gourds to the table, Isaiah some vegetables, Ezekiel blackberries, Zaccheus sycamore 
flowers, Adam lemons, Daniel lupins, Pharaoh peppers, Cain cardoons, Eve figs, Rachel apples, 
Anamas


some plums as big as diamonds, Leah onions, Aaron olives, Joseph an egg, Noah grapes, Simeon peach 
pits, while Jesus was singing the “Dies irae” and gaily poured over all the dishes some vinegar 
that he squeezed from a little sponge he had taken from the spear of one of the King of France's 
archers.

At this point Jorge, having removed his vitrq ad legendum, lighted a burning bush; Sarah had 
provided kindling for it, Jephtha had brought it, Isaac had unloaded it, Joseph had carved it, and 
while Jacob opened the well and Daniel sat down beside the lake, the servants brought water, Noah 
wine, Hagar a wineskin, Abraham a calf that Raab tied to a stake while Jesus held out the rope and 
Elijah bound its fee†. Then Absolom hung. him by his hair, Pe†er held ou† his sword, Cain killed 
him, Herod shed his blood, Shem threw away his giblets and dung, Jacob added the oil, Molessadon 
the salt; Antiochus put him on the fire, Rebecca cooked him, and Eve first tasted him and was taken 
sick, but Adam said not to give it a thought and slapped Severinus on the back as he suggested 
adding aromatic herbs. Then Jesus broke the bread and passed around some fishes, Jacob shouted 
because Esau had eaten all the pottage, Isaac was devouring a roast kid, and Jonah a boiled whale, 
and Jesus fasted for forty days and forty nights.

Meanwhile, ctll came in and out bringing choice game of every shqpe and color, of which Benjamin 
ctlwctys kep† †he bigges† share and Mary †he choices† morsel, while Mar†ha complained of always 
having †o wash the dishes. Then they divided up the calf, which had meanwhile grown very big, and 
John was given the head, Abessalom the brain, Aaron the tongue, Sampson the jaw, Peter the ear, 
Holofernes the head, Leah the rump, Saul the neck, Jonah the belly, Tobiqs the gall, Eve the rib, 
Mary the breast, Elizabeth the vulva, Moses the toil, Lot the legs, and Ezekiel the bones. All the 
while, Jesus was devouring a donkey, Saint Francis a wolf, Abel a Iamb, Eve a moray, the Baptist a 
locust, Pharaoh an octopus (naturally, I said to myself, but why*), and David was eating Spanish 
fly, flinging himself on the maiden nigra sed formosa while Sampson bit into a lion's behind and 
Thecla fled screaming,
pursued by a hairy black spider.
All were obviously drunk by now, and some slipped on the wine, some fell into the jars with only 
their legs sticking out, crossed like two stakes, and all of Jesus‘s fingers were black as he 
handed out pages of books saying’: Tqke †his and ea†, †hese qre †he riddles of Synphosius, 
including †he one abou† †he fish that is the son of God and your Saviour.

Sprawled on his back, Adam gulped, and the wine came from ’his rib, Noah cursed Ham in his sleep, 
Holofernes snored, all unsuspecting, Jonah slept soundly, Peter kept watch till cockcrow, and Jesus 
woke with a start, hearing Bernard Gui and Bertrand del Poggetto plotting to burn the maiden; and 
he shouted: Father, if it be thy will, let this chalice pass from me! And some poured badly and 
some drank well, some died laughing and some laughed dying, some bore vases and some drank from 
another's cup. Susanna shouted that she would never grant her beautiful white body to the cellarer 
and to Salvatore for a miserable beef heart, Pilctte wandered around the refectory like a lost soul 
ctsking for water to wash his hands, and Fra Dolcino, with his plumed hat, brought the water, then 
opened his garment, snickering, and displayed his pudenda red with blood, while Cain taunted him 
and embraced the beautiful Margaret of Trent: and Dolcino fell to weeping and went to rest his head 
on’ the shoulder of Bernard Gui, calling him Angelic Pope, Ubertino consoled him wi†h a †ree of 
life, Michael of Ceseno with a gold purse, the Marys sprinkled him with unguents, and Adam 
convinced him to bite into a freshly plucked apple.


And then the vaults of the Aedificium opened and from the heavens descended Ro9erBacon on a flying 
machine, unico homine regente. Then David played his lyre, Salome danced with her seven veils, and 
at the fall of each veil she blew one of the seven trumpets and showed one of the seven seals, 
until only the amicta sole remained. Everyone said there had never been such a jolly abbey, and 
Berengar pulled up everyone's habit, man and woman, kissing them all on the anus.
Then it was that the abbot flew into a rage, because, he said, he had organized such a lovely feast 
and nobody was giving him anything; so †hey all ou†did one another in bringing him gif†s and 
treasures, a bull, a Iamb, a lion, a camel, a stag, a calf, a mare, a chorio† of the sun, the chin 
of Sain† Eubanus, the tail of Saint Ubertina, the uterus of Saint Venantia, the neck of Saint 
Burgosina en9ravedlike a goblet at the age of twelve, and a copy of the Pentogonum Salomonis. But 
the abbot started yelling thot they were trying to distract his attention with their behavior, and 
in fact they were looting the treasure crypt, where we all were, and a most precious book had been 
stolen which spoke of scorpions and the seven trumpets, and he called the King of France's archers 
to search all the suspects. And, to everyone's shame, the archers found a multicolored cloth on 
Hagar, a gold seal on Rachel, a silver mirror in Thecla's bosom, a siphon under Benjamin's arm, a 
silk coverlet among Judith‘s clothes, a spear in Longinus's hqnd, and a neighbor's wife in the arms 
of Abimelech. But the worst wets when they found a black roos†er on †he girl, block and beautiful 
she was, like a co† of †he some color, and †hey called her a witch and a Pseudo Apostle, so all 
flung themselves on her, to punish her. The Baptist decapitated her, Abel cut her open, Adam drove 
her out, Nebuchadnezzar wrote zodiacal signs on her breast with q fiery hand, Elijah carried her 
off in a fiery chariot, Noah plunged her in water, Lot changed her in†o a pillar of sal†, Susanna 
accused her of lus†, Joseph betrayed her wi†h another woman, Ananias stuck her into a furnace, 
Sampson chained her up, Paul flagellated her, Peter crucified her head down, Stephen stoned her, 
Lawrence burned her on a grate, Bartholomew skinned her, Judas denounced her, the cellorer burned 
her, and Peter denied everything. Then they all were on that body, flinging excrement on her, 
farting in her face, urinating on her hectd, vomiting on her bosom, tearing out her hair, whipping 
her buttocks with glowing torches. The girl's body, once so beautiful and sweet, was now lacerated, 
torn into fragments that were scattered among the glass cases and gold-and- crystal reliquaries of 
the crypt. Or, rather, it was not the body of the girl that went to fill the crypt, it was the 
frctgments of the crypt thqt, whirling, grctdually composed to form the girl's body, now
something mineral, and then ogain decomposed and scattered, sacred dust of segments accumulated by 
insane blasphemy. It was now as if a single immense body had, in the course of millennia, dissolved 
into its parts, and these parts had been arranged to occupy the whole crypt, more splendid than the 
ossarium of the dead monks but not unlike it, and as if the substantial form of mon‘s very body, 
the masterpiece of creation, had shattered into plural and separate accidental forms, thus 
becomin9the image of its own opposite, form no longer ideal but earthly, of dust and stinking 
fragments, capable of signifying only death and destruction.
Now I could no Ion9erfind the banque†ers or †he gif†s †hey had brou9h†,i† was as if all †he 9uests 
of the symposium were now in the crypt, each mummified in its own residue, eoch the diaphanous 
synecdoche of itself, Rachel as a bone, Daniel as a tooth, Sampson as a jaw, Jesus as a shred of 
purple garment. As if, at the end of the banquet, the feast transformed into the girl's slaughter, 
it had become the universal slaughter, and here I was seeing its final result, the bodies (no, the 
whole terrestrial and sublunar body of those ravenous and thirsting feasters) transformed into a 
single dead body, lacerated and tormented like Dolcino's body after his torture, transformed into a 
loathsome and resplendent treasure, stretched out to its full extent like the hide of a skinned and 
hung animal, which


still contained, however, petrified, the leather sinews, the viscera, ctnd all the organs, and even 
the features of the face. The skin with each of its folds, wrinkles, and scars, with its velvety 
plains, its forest of hairs, the dermis, the bosom, the pudenda, having become a sumptuous damask, 
and the breasts, the nails, the horny formations under the heel, the threads of the lashes, the 
watery substance of †he eyes, †he flesh of †he lips, †he †hin spine of †he back, †he ctrchi†ec†ure 
of †he bones, everything reduced †o sandy powder, †hough nothing had los† i†s own form or 
respective placemen†, the legs emptied and limp as a boot, their flesh lying flat like a chasuble 
with all the scarlet embroidery of the veins, the engraved pile of the viscera, the intense and 
mucous ruby of the heart, the pearly file of even teeth arranged like a necklace, with the tongue 
as a pink-and-blue pendant, the fingers in a row like tapers, the seal of the navel reknotting the 
threads of the unrolled carpet of the belly ... From every corner of the crypt, now I was grinned 
at, whispered to, bidden to death by this macrobody divided among gloss cases and reliquaries and 
ye† reconstructed in its vas† and irrational whole, and it was the same body thot at the supper had 
eaten and tumbled obscenely but here, instead, appeared to me fixed in the intangibility of its 
deaf and blind ruin. And Ubertino, seizing me by the arm, digging his nails into my flesh, 
whispered to me: “You see, it is the same thing, what first triumphed in its folly and took delight 
in its jesting now is here, punished and rewarded, liberated from the seduction of the passions, 
rigidified by eternity, consigned to the eternal frost thqt is to preserve and purify it, saved 
from corruption through the triumph of corruption, because nothing more can reduce to dust that 
which is already dust and mineral substance, mors est quies viatoris, finis es† omnis laboris.  ”

But suddenly Salvatore entered the crypt, glowing like a devil, and cried, “Fool! Can't you see 
this is the great Lyotard* What are you afraid of, my little master* Here is the cheese in batter!” 
And suddenly the crypt was bright with reddish flashes and it was again the kitchen, but not so 
much a kitchen as the inside of a greo† womb, mucous and viscid, and in the center an animal block 
as a raven and with a thousand hands was chained to q huge grate, qnd it extended those limbs to 
snatch everybody around it, and as the peasant when thirsty squeezes a bunch of grapes, so that 
great beast squeezed those it had snatched so that its hands broke them all, the legs of some, the 
heads of others, and then it sated itself, belching a fire thot seemed to stink more than sulphur. 
But, wondrous mystery, thctt scene no longer instilled fear in me, ctnd I was surprised to see that 
I could watch ectsily thot “good devil” (so I thought) who after all was none other than Salvatore, 
becouse now I knew all about the mortal human body, its sufferings and its corruption, and I feared 
nothing any more. In fact, in the light of that flame, which now seemed mild and convivial, I saw 
again all the guests of the supper, now restored to their original forms, singing and declaring, 
that everything was beginning again, and among them was the maiden, whole and most beautiful, who 
said to me, “it is nothing, it is nothing, you will see: I shall be even more beautiful than 
before; just let me go for a moment and burn on the pyre, then we shall meet again here!” And she 
displayed to me, God have mercy on me, her vulva, into which I entered, and I found myself in a 
beautiful cave, which seemed the happy valley of the 9oldenage, dewy with waters and fruits and 
trees that bore cheeses in batter. And all were thanking
the abbot for the lovely feast, and they showed him their affection and good humor by pushing him,
kicking him, tearing his clothes, laying him on the ground, striking his rod with rods, as he 
laughed and begged them to stop tickling him. And, riding mounts whose nostrils emitted clouds of 
brimstone, the Friars of the Poor Life entered, carrying at their belts purses full of gold with 
which they transformed wolves into lambs and lambs into wolves and crowned them emperor with the 
approval of the assembly, of the people, who sang praises of God's infinite omnipotence. “UI 
cachinnis dissolvatur,
†orquea†ur ric†ibus!” Jesus shouted, waving his crown of †horns. Pope John came in, cursing †he


confusion and saying, "At this rqte I don't know where it all will end!" But everyone mocked him 
and, led by †he abbo†, wen† ou† wi†h †he pigs †o hun† truffles in †he fores†. I was abou† †o follow 
†hem when in a corner I saw William, emerging from the labyrinth and carrying in his hand the 
magnet, which pulled him rapidly northward. "Do not leave me, master!" I shouted. "I, too, want to 
see what is in the finis Africae!"

"You have already seen it!" William answered, far away by now. And I woke up as the last words of 
the funeral chant were ending in the church:
Lacrimosa dies illa
qua resurget ex favilla iudicandus homo reus. huic ergo porce deus!
Pie lesu domine

dona eis requiem.

A sign that my vision, rapid like all visions, if it had not lasted the space of an "amen," as the 
saying goes, had lasted almost the length of a "Dies irae."

AFTER TERCE
In which William explains Adso‘s dream to him.

Dazed, I came out through the main door qnd discovered q little crowd there. The Franciscans were 
leaving, and William had come down to say good-bye to them.

I joined in the farewells, the fraternal embraces. Then I asked William when the others would be 
leaving, with the prisoners. He told me they had already left, half on hour before, while we were 
in the treasure crypt, or perhaps, I thought, when I was dreaming.

For a moment I was aghast, then I recovered myself. Better so. I would not have been able to bear 
the sight of the condemned (I meant the poor wretched cellorer and Salvotore ... and, of course, I 
also meqnt the girl) being dragged off, far away and forever. And besides, I was still so upset by 
my dream that my feelings seemed numb.

As the caravan of Minorites headed for the gate, to leave the abbey, William and I remained in 
front of †he church, bo†h melancholy, †hough for differen† reosons. Then I decided †o †eII my 
mos†er my dream. Though the vision hod been multiform and illogical, I remembered it with. amazing 
clarity, image by image, action by action, word by word. And so I narrated it, omitting nothing, 
because I knew that dreams are often mysterious messages in which learned people can read distinct 
prophecies.



William listened to me in silence, then asked me, “Do you know what you have dreamed*” “Exactly 
what I told you ...” I replied, at a loss.
“Of course, I reolize that. But do you know that to a great extent what you tell me has already 
been written* You have added people and events of these past few days to a picture already familiar 
to you, because you have read †he s†ory of your dream somewhere, or i† was †oId you as a boy, in 
school, in †he convent. It is the Coena Cyprioni.”

I remained puzzled briefly. Then I remembered. He was right! Perhaps I had forgotten the title, but 
what adult monk or unruly young novice has not smiled or laughed over the various visions, in prose 
or rhyme, of this story, which belongs to the tradition of the paschol season and the ioca 
monochorum* Though the work is banned or execrated by the more austere among novice masters, there 
is still not a convent in which the monks have not whispered it to one another, variously condensed 
and revised, while some piously copied it, declaring thot behind a veil of mirth it concealed 
secret moral lessons, and others encouraged its circulation because, they said, through its 
jesting, the young could more easily commit to memory certain episodes of sacred history. A verse 
version had been written for Pope John VIII, with the inscription “I loved to jest; accept me, dear 
Pope John, in my jesting. And, if you wish, you can also laugh.” And it was said that Charles the 
Bald himself had staged it, in the guise of a comic sacred mystery, in a rhymed version †o 
en†er†ain his dignitaries a† supper.

And how many scoldings had I received from my masters when, with my companions, I recited passages 
from it! I remembered an old friar at Melk who used to say that a, virtuous man like Cyprian could 
not hove written such an indecent thing, such a sacrilegious parody of Scripture, worthier of an 
infidel and a buffoon than of q holy martyr.  For years I had forgotten those childish jokes. Why 
on this dqy
had the Coena reappeared so vividly in my dream* I had always thought that dreams were divine 
messages, or at worst absurd stammerings of the sleeping memory about things that had happened 
during the clay. I was now realizing that one can also dream books, and therefore dream of dreams.

“I should like to be Ar†emidorus to in†erpre† your dream correctly,” William soid. “Bu† i† seems to 
me that even without Artemidorus's learning it is easy to understand what happened. In these past 
days, my poor boy, you have experienced a series of events in which every upright rule seems to 
have been destroyed. And this morning, in your sleeping mind, there returned the memory of a kind 
of comedy in which, albeit with other intentions, the world is described upside down. You inserted 
into that work your most recent memories, your anxieties, your fears. From the marginalia of Adelmo 
you went on to relive a great carnival where everything seems to proceed in the wrong direction, 
and yet, as in the Coena, each does what he really did in life. And finally you asked yourself, in 
the dream, which world is the false one, and what it means to walk head down. Your dream no longer 
distinguished whqt is down and what is up, where life is and where death. Your dream cost doubt on 
the teachings you have received.”

“My dream,” I said virtuously, “not I. But dreams are not divine messages, then; they are 
diabolical savings, and they contain no truth!”


“I don't know, Adso," William soid. “We already hqve so many truths in our possession thqt if the 
day came when someone insisted on deriving a truth even from our dreams, then the day of the 
Antichrist would truly be at hand. And yet, the more I think of your dream, the more revealing it 
seems to me. Perhaps no† †o you, bu† †o me. Forgive me if I use your dream in order †o work ou† my 
hypotheses; I know, i† is q base ac†ion, i† should no† be done.  Bu† I believe †ha† your sleeping 
soul understood more
things thon I have in six days, and owake. ”
"Truly*”

“Truly. Or perhaps not. I find your dream revealing because it coincides with one of my hypotheses. 
But you hove given me great help. Thank you.”

“But what was there in my dream thot interests you so much* It mode no sense, like all dreams!“ "It 
had another sense like all dreams, and visions. It must be read as an allegory, or an analogy. ”
"Like Scripture*"
“A dream is a scripture, and many scriptures are nothing but dreams."

SEXT

In which the succession of librarians is reconstructed, and there is further information about the 
mysterious book.

William decided †o go back up †o †he scrip†orium, from which he had jus† come. He osked Benno's 
leave to consult the catalogue, and he leafed through it rapidly. “It must be around here,“ he 
said, “I saw it just an hour ago.  ” He stopped at one page. "Here," he said, "read this title.”

As a single en†ry †here was a group of four †i†Ies, indico†ing †ho† one volume con†ained several 
†ex†s. I read:

1. ar. de dictis cuiusdam stulti
II. syr. IibeIIus alchemicus aegypt.
III. Exposi†io Magis†ri Alcofriboe de coena bea†i Cypriani Car†aginensis Episcopi
IV. Liber acepholus de stupris virginum et meretricum amoribus "What is it*” I asked.
"It is our book,” William whispered to me. "This is why your dream reminded me of something. Now I 
am sure this is it. And in fact”—he glanced quickly at the pages immediately preceding and 
following— "in fact, here are the books I was thinking about, all together. But this isn't what I 
wanted to check.


See here. Do you have your tablet* Good. We must make a calculation, and try to remember clearly 
what Alinardo told us the other day as well as what we heard this morning from Nicholas. Now, 
Nicholas told us he arrived here about thirty years ago, and Abo had already been named abbot. The 
abbot before him was Paul of Rimini. Is that right* Let's say this succession took place around 
1290, more or less, it doesn't matter. Nicholas also told us that, when he arrived, Robert of 
Bobbio wets already librarian. Correc†* Then Rober† died, and the pos† was given to Malachi, Ie†’s 
say a† the beginning of this century. Write this down. There is a period, however, before Nicholas 
came, when Paul of Rimini was librarian. How long was he in that post* We weren‘t told. We could 
examine the abbey ledgers, but I imagine the abbot has them, and for the moment I would prefer not 
to ask him for them. Let‘s suppose Paul was appointed librarian sixty years ago. Write that. Why 
does Alinardo complain of the fact that, about fifty years ago, he should have been given the post 
of librarian and instead it went to another* Was he referring to Paul of Rimini*”

“Or †o Robert of Bobbio!” I said.

“So it would seem. But now look at this catalogue. As you know, the titles are recorded in the 
order of acquisition. And who writes them in this ledger* The librarian. Therefore, by the changes 
of handwriting in these pages we can establish the succession of librarians. Now we will look a† 
the catalogue from the end; the last handwriting is Malachi's, you see. And it fills only a few 
pages. The abbey has not acquired many books in these last thirty years. Then, as we work backward, 
a series of pages begins in a shaky hand. I clearly read †he presence of Rober† of Bobbio, who was 
ill. Rober† probably did no† occupy †he position long. And †hen wha† do we find* Pages and pages in 
another hand, straight and confident, a whole series of acquisitions (including the group of books 
I was examining a moment ago), truly impressive. Paul of Rimini must have worked hard! Too hard, if 
you recall that Nicholas told us he became abbot while still a young man. But let‘s assume that in 
a few years this voracious reader enriched †he abbey wi†h so many books. Weren’† we told he was 
called Abbas agraphicus because of that strange defect, or illness, which mode him unable to write* 
Then who wrote these pages* His assistant librarian, I would say. But if by chance this assistant 
librarian were then named librarian, he would then hove continued writing, and we would have 
figured out why there are so many pctges here in the same hctnd. So, then, between Pctul and Robert 
we would have another librarian, chosen abou† fif†y years ago, who was †he mysterious rival of 
Alinardo, who was hoping, as an older man, to succeed Paul. Then this man died, and somehow, 
contrary to Alinardo's expectations and the expectations of others, Robert was named in his place.”

“But why are you so sure this is the right scansion* Even granting that this handwritin9is the 
nameless librarian's, why couldn‘t Paul also have written the titles of the still earlier pages*”

“Because among the acquisitions they recorded all bulls and decretals, ond these are precisely 
dated. I meqn, if you find here, ns you do, the Firma cautela of Boniface the Seventh, dated 1296, 
you know thot text did not arrive before thot year, and you can assume it didn't arrive much later. 
I have these milestones, so to speak, placed along the years, so if I grant that Paul of Rimini 
became librarian in 1265 and abbo† in 1275, and I find †ha† his hand, or †he hand of someone else 
who is no† Rober† of Bobbio, Ias†s from 1265 †o 1285, †hen I discover a discrepancy of †en yeors.”
My master was truly very sharp. “But what conclusions do you draw from this discrepancy*” I asked.


"None," he answered. "Only some premises.”

Then he got up and went to talk with Benno, who was staunchly at his post, but with a very unsure 
air. He was still behind his old desk and had not dared take over Malachi's, by the catalogue. 
William addressed him with some coolness. We had not forgotten the unpleasant scene of the previous 
evening.

"Even in your new and powerful position, Brother Librarian, I trust you will answer a question. 
That morning when Adelmo and the others were talking here about witty riddles, and Berengar made 
the first reference to the finis Africae, did anybody mention the Coena Cypriani*”

"Yes,” Benno said, “didn't I tell you* Before they talked about the riddles of Symphosius, 
Venantius himself mentioned the Coena, and Malachi became furious, saying it was an ignoble work 
and reminding us that the abbot had forbidden anyone to read it. ”
"The abbot*" William said. “Very interesting. Thank you, Benno.“

"Wait,” Benno soid, "I want to talk with you.” He motioned us to follow him out of the scriptorium, 
onto the stairs going down to the kitchen, so the others could not hear him. His lips were 
trembling.
"I'm frightened, William,” he said. "They've killed Malachi. Now I qm the one who knows too many 
things. Besides, the group of Italians hate me. ... They do not want another foreign librarian.  I
believe the others were murdered for this very reason.  I‘ve never told you about Alinardo's hatred
for Malachi, his bi††erness.“
“Who wqs i† who †ook †he pos† from him, yectrs ago*“
“That I don‘t know: he always talks about it vaguely, and anyway it's ancient history. They must 
all be dead now. But the group of Italians around Alinordo speaks often  spoke often of Malachi as 
a straw
man ... put here by someone else, with the complicity of the qbbot. ... Not realizing it, I  I hqve
become involved in †he conflic† of †he †wo hostile factions.  I became aware of i† only †his 
morning.
.. Italy is a land of conspiracies: they poison popes here, so just imagine a poor boy like me. ...
Yesterday I hadn’† understood, I believed †ha† book was responsible for everything, bu† now I'm no 
longer sure. That was the pretext: you've seen that the book was found but Malachi died all the 
same.
I must ... I want to  I would like to run away. What do you advise me to do*”
"Stay calm. Now you ask advice, do you* Yesterday evening you seemed ruler of the world. Silly 
youth, if you had helped me yesterday we would have prevented this last crime. You are the one who 
love Malachi the book that brought him to his death. But tell me one thin9 at least. Did you have 
that book in your hands, did you touch it, read it* Then why ore you not dead*“
"I don't know. I swear I didn't touch it; or, rather, I touched it when I took it in the laboratory 
but without opening it: I hid it inside my habit, then went and put it under the pallet in my cell. 
I knew Malachi was watching me, so I came back at once to the scriptorium. And afterward, when 
Malachi offered to make me his assistant, I gave him the book. That's the whole story.“

“Don't tell me you didn't even open it.”
“Yes, I did open it before hiding it, to make sure it really was the one you were also looking for. 
It began with an Arabic manuscript, then I believe one in Syriac, then there was a Latin text, and 
finally one in Greek. ”
I remembered the abbreviations we had seen in the catalogue. The first two titles were listed as 
“ar.” and “syr” It was the book! But William persisted: “You touched it and you are not dead. So 
touching it does not kill. And whot con you tell me about the Greek text* Did you look at it*”
“Very briefly. Just long enough to realize it had no title; it began as if a port were missing. ”
“Liber acephalus ” William murmured.
“I tried to read the first page, but the truth is that my Greek is very poor. And then my curiosity 
was aroused by another detail, connected with those some pages in Greek. I did not leaf through all 
of them, because I wqs unable to. The pqges were—how can I explain*—damp, stuck together. It wqs 
hord to separote one from the other. Because the parchment was odd  softer than other
parchments, and the first page was rotten, and almost crumbling. It was  well, strange.”
" 'Strange’: the very word Severinus used,“ William said.
“The parchment did not seem like parchment. ... It seemed like cloth, but very fine ” Benno went 
on.
“Charta linteo, or linen paper,” William said. “Had you never seen it*”
“I had heard of it, but I don't believe I ever saw it before. It is said to be very costly, and 
delicate. That's why it is rarely used. The Arabs make it, don't they*”
“They were the first. But it is also mqde here in Italy, at Fqbriano. And also  Why, of course,
naturally!” William‘s eyes shone. “What o beautiful ond interesting revelation! Good for you, 
Benno! I thank you! Yes, I imagine that here in the library charta lintea must be rare, because no 
very recent manuscripts have arrived. And besides, many are afraid linen paper will not survive 
through the centuries like parchment, ond perhops that is true. Let us imagine, if they wanted 
something here that was not more perennial than bronze  Charta lintea, then* Very well. Good-bye. 
And don't worry.
You‘re in no danger.”
We went away from the scriptorium, leaving Benno calmer, if not totally reassured.

The abbo† was in †he refectory. William wen† †o him and asked †o speak wi†h him. Abo, unable †o 
temporize, agreed to meet us in a short while at his house.

NONES



In which the abbot refuses to listen to William, discourses on the language of gems, and expresses 
a wish that there be no further investigation of the recent unhappy events.

The abbot's apartments were over the chapter hall, and from the window of the large and sumptuous 
main room, where he received us, you could see, on thqt clear qnd windy day, beyond the roof of the 
abba†iaI church, †he massive Aedificium.

The abbot, standing at the window, was in fact contemplating it, and he pointed it out to us with a 
solemn gesture.

“An admirable fortress,” he said, “whose proportions sum up the golden rule that governed the 
construction of the ark. Divided into three stories, because three is the number of the Trinity, 
three were the angels who visited Abraham, the days Jonah spent in the belly of the great fish, and 
the days Jesus and Lazarus passed in the sepulcher; three times Christ asked the Father to let the 
bitter chalice pass from him, and three times he hid himself to pray with the apostles. Three times 
Peter denied him, and three times Christ appeared to his disciples after the Resurrection. The 
theological virtues are three, and three are the holy languctges, the parts of the soul, the 
classes of intellectuctl creatures, angels, men, and devils: there are three kinds of sound—vox, 
flatus, pulsus—and three epochs of human history, before, during, and after the law.”

“A wondrous harmony of mystical relations,” William agreed.

“But the square shape also,” the abbot continued, “is rich in spiritual lessons. The cardinal 
points are four, and the seasons, the elements, and heat, cold, wet, and dry: birth, growth, 
maturity, and old age; the species of animals, celestial, terrestrial, aerial, and aquatic: the 
colors forming the rainbow: and the number of years required to mqke a leap year.”

“Oh, to be sure,” William said, and three plus four is seven, a superlatively mystical number, 
whereas three multiplied by four makes twelve, like the apostles, and twelve by twelve makes one 
hundred forty-four, which is the number of the elect.“ And to this lqst display of mystical 
knowledge of the ideal world of numbers, †he abbo† had nothing further †o odd. Thus William could 
come †o †he poin†.
“We must talk about the latest events, on which I have reflected at length,” he said.
The abbot turned his back to the window and looked straight at William with q stern face. “At too- 
great length, perhaps. I must confess, Brother William, that I expected more of you. Almost six 
days have passed since you arrived here; four monks have died besides Adelmo, two have been 
arrested by the Inquisition—it was justice, to be sure, but we could hove avoided this shame if the 
inquisitor had not been obliged to concern himself with the previous crimes—and finally the meeting 
over which I presided has—precisely because of all these wicked deeds—had a pitiful outcome. .. “
William remained silent, embarrassed. Without question, the abbot was right.
“That is true,” he admitted. “I have not lived up to your expectations, but I will explain why, 
Your Sublimity. These crimes do not stem from a brawl or from some vendetta among the monks, but 
from deeds that, in their turn, originate in the remote history of the abbey. ”



The abbot looked at him uneasily. "What do you meon* I myself realize that the key is not that 
miserable affair of the cellarer, which has intersected another story. But the other, that other 
which I may know but cannot discuss ... I hoped it was clear, and that you would speak to me about 
it. ”

"Your Sublimi†y is thinking of some deed he learned obou† in confession.  The abbo† looked away, 
and
William continued: “If Your Magnificence wants to know whether I know, without having learned it 
from Your Magnificence, that there were illicit relations between Berengar and Adelmo, and between 
Berengar and Malachi, well, yes, everyone in the abbey, knows this. “

The abbot blushed violently. “I do not believe it useful to speak of such things in the presence of 
this novice. And I do not believe, now that the. meeting is over, that you need him any longer as 
scribe. Go, boy,“ he soid to me imperiously. Humiliated, I went. But in my curiosity I crouched 
outside the door of the hall, which I left ajar, so thqt I could follow the dialogue.

William resumed speaking: "So, then, these illicit relations, if they did take place, had scant 
influence on the painful events. The key is elsewhere, qs I thought you imagined. Everything turns 
on the theft and possession of a book, which was concealed in †he finis Africae, and which is now 
†here ogain †hanks to Malachi‘s intervention, though, as you have seen, the sequence of crimes was 
not thereby arrested.”

A long silence followed: then the qbbot resumed speaking, in a broken, hesitant voice, like someone
†aken aback by unexpected revelations. "This is impossible ... you How do you know abou† †he finis
Africae* Have you violated my ban and entered †he library*“

William ought to have told the truth, but the abbot‘s rage would have known no bounds. Yet, 
obviously my master did not want to lie. He chose to answer the question with another question: 
“Did Your Magnificence not soy to me, ot our first meeting, that a man like me, who had described 
Brunellus so well without ever having seen him, would have no difficulty picturing places to which 
he did not have access*“

So that is it,” Abo said. "But why do you think what you think*“

"How I arrived at my conclusion is too long a story. But a series of crimes was committed to 
prevent many from discovering something that it was considered undesirable for them to discover. 
Now all those who knew something of the library's secrets, whether rightly, or through trickery, 
are dead. Only one person remains: yourself.”

“Do you wish †o insinuate ... you wish †o insinuate “ †he obbo† said.

"Do not misunderstand me,” said William, who probably had indeed wished to insinuate. "I soy there 
is someone who knows and wants no one else to know. As the last to know, you could be the next 
victim. Unless you tell me what you know about that forbidden book, and, especially, who in the 
abbey might know wha† you know, and perhaps more, obou† †he library.”

“It is cold in here,“ the abbot said. “Let us go out.“


I moved rapidly qway from the door and waited for them at the heqd of the stairs. The abbot saw me 
and smiled at me.

“How many upsetting things this young monk must have heard in the past few days! Come, boy, do not 
allow yourself to be too distressed. It seems to me thctt more plots have been imagined than really 
exis†. ”

He raised one hand and allowed the daylight to illuminate a splendid ring he wore on his fourth 
finger, the emblem of his power. The ring sparkled with all the brilliance of its stones.

“You recognize i†, do you no†*” he said †o me. “The symbol of my au†hori†y, bu† also of my burden. 
I† is not on ornament: it is a splendid syllogy of the divine word whose guardian I am.” With his 
fingers he touched the stone—or, rather, the arrangement of variegated stones composing that 
admirable masterpiece of human art and nature. “This is amethyst,” he said, “which is the mirror of 
humility and reminds us of the ingenuousness and sweetness of Saint Matthew; this is chalcedony, 
mark of charity, symbol of the piety of Joseph and Saint James the Greater: this is jasper, which 
bespeoks faith and is qssociqted with Saint Peter; and sardonyx, sign of martyrdom, which recalls 
Saint Bartholomew; this is sapphire, hope and contemplation, the stone of Saint Andrew and Saint 
Paul: and beryl, sound doctrine, learning, and longanimity, the virtues of Saint Thomas.  How 
splendid the language of gems
is,” he went on, lost in his mystical vision, “which the lapidaries of tradition have translated 
from the reasoning of Aaron and the description of the heavenly Jerusalem in the book of the 
apostle. For that matter, the walls of Zion were decked with the same jewels that decorated the 
pectoral of Moses's brother, except for carbuncle, agate, and onyx, which, mentioned in Exodus, are 
replaced in the Apocalypse by chalcedony, sardonyx, chrysoprase, and jacinth.”

He moved the ring and dctzzled my eyes with its sparkling, as if he wctnted to stun me. “Marvelous 
language, is it not* For other fathers stones signify still other things. For Pope Innocent the 
Third the ruby announced calm and patience; the garnet, charity. For Saint Bruno aquamarine 
concentrates theological learning in the virtue of its purest rays. Turquoise signifies joy; 
sardonyx suggests the serqphim; topaz, the cherubim: jqsper, thrones; chrysolite, dominions; 
sapphire, the virtues; onyx, the powers; beryl, principalities; ruby, archongels; and emerald, 
angels. The language of gems is multiform; each expresses several truths, according to the sense of 
the selected interpretation, according to the context in which they appear. And who decides what is 
the level of interpretation and what is the proper context* You know, my boy, for they have taught 
you: it is authority, the most reliable commentator of all and the most invested with prestige, 
ctnd therefore with sanctity. Otherwise how to interpret the multiple signs that the world sets 
before our sinner's eyes, how to avoid the misunderstandings into which the Devil lures us* Mind 
you: it is extraordinary how the Devil hates the language of gems, as Saint Hildegard testifies. 
The foul beast sees in it a message illuminated by different meanin9s or levels of knowledge, and 
he would like to destroy it because he, the Enemy,
senses in the splendor of stones the echo of the marvels in his possession before his fall, and he
understands that this radiance is produced by fire, which is his torment.” He held out the ring for 
me to kiss, and I knelt. He stroked my head. “And so, boy, you must forget the things, no doubt 
erroneous, thot you have heard these days. You have entered the noblest, the greatest order of all: 
of this order I am an abbo†, and you are under my jurisdiction. Hear my command: forge†, and may 
your lips be sealed forever. Swear.”


Moved, subjugated, I would certctinly have sworn. And you, my good reader, would not be able now to 
read this faithful chronicle of mine. But at this point William intervened, not perhaps to prevent 
me from swearing, bu† in an ins†inc†ive reaction, ou† of irri†a†ion, †o in†errup† †he abbo†, †o 
break †ha† spell he had surely cast.

“Wha† does †he boy have †o do wi†h i†* I asked you a question, I warned you of a danger, I osked 
you to tell me a name.  Do you now wish me, too, to kiss the ring and swear to forget what I have 
learned
or what I suspect*”















It was more than a dismissal, it was an expulsion. William said good-bye and we went down the 
stairs. “What does this mean*” I asked. I no longer understood anything.
“Try to formulate a hypothesis. You must have learned how it is done.”
“Actually, I have learned I must formulate at least two, one in opposition to the other, and both 
incredible. Very well, then ...” I gulped: formulating hypotheses made me nervous. “First 
hypothesis: the abbot knew everything already and imagined you would discover nothing. Second 
hypothesis: the abbo† never suspected anything (obou† wha† I don’† know, because I don’† know 
wha†’s in your mind). But, anyhow, he went on thinking it was all because of a quarrel between ... 
between sodomite monks. ...
Now, however, you have opened his eyes, he has suddenly understood something terrible, has thought 
of a name, has a precise ideo obou† who is responsible for the crimes. Bu† a† this poin† he wants 
to resolve †he mo††er by himself and wan†s †o be rid of you, in order †o save †he honor of †he 
abbey.”


“Good work. You are beginning †o reason well. Bu† you see already †ha† in bo†h cases our abbo† is 
concerned for †he good name of his monastery. Murderer or nex† victim as he may be, he does no† 
want defamatory news about this holy community to travel beyond these mountains. Kill his monks, 
but do no† †ouch †he honor of his abbey. Ah, by ...“ William was now becoming infuriated. "Tha† 
bastard of a feudql lord, that peacock who gqined fame for hqving been the Aquinas's gravedigger, 
that inflated wineskin who exis†s only because he wears a ring as big as †he bo††om of a glass! 
Proud, proud, all of you Cluniacs, worse than princes, more baronial than barons!”
"Master ..." I ventured, hurt, in a reproochful tone.

"You be quiet, you are made of the same stuff. Your band are not simple men, or sons of the simple. 
If a peasant comes along you may receive him, but as I saw yesterday, you do not hesitate to hand 
him over to the secular arm. But not one of your own, no: he must be shielded. Abo is capable of 
identifying the wretch, stabbing him in the treasure crypt, and passing out his kidneys amon9 the 
reliquaries, provided †he honor of †he abbey is saved. ... Have a Franciscan, a plebeian Minori†e, 
discover †he ra†’s nest of this holy house* AT, no, this is something Abo cannot allow at any 
price. Thank you, Brother William, the Emperor needs you, you see what a bectutiful ring I hctve, 
good-bye. But now the challenge is no† jus† a matter between me and Abo, i† is between me and the 
whole business: I am no† leaving these walls until I have found out. He wants me to leave tomorrow 
morning, does he* Very well, it‘s his house; bu† by tomorrow morning I mus† know. I mus†.”

"You mus†* Who obliges you now*“

"No one ever obliges us to know, Adso. We must, that is all, even if we comprehend imperfectly.”

I was still confused and humiliated by William's words against my order qnd its abbots. And I tried 
to justify Abo in part, formulating a third hypothesis, exercising a skill at which, it seemed to 
me, I was becoming very dextrous. “You have not considered a third possibility, master,” I said. 
“We had noticed these past days, and this morning it seemed quite clear to us after Nicholas‘s 
confidences and the rumors we hectrd in church, that there is ct group of Itctlian monks reluctant 
to tolerate the succession of foreign librarians: they occuse the abbo† of no† respecting 
tradition, and, as I understand i†, they hide behind old Alinardo, thrusting him forward like a 
standard, to ask for a different government of
†he abbey. So perhaps †he abbo† fears our revelations could give his enemies a weapon, and he wan†s 
to settle the question with great prudence. ”
“That is possible. But he is still an inflated wineskin, and he will get himself killed.”
We were in the cloister. The wind was growing angrier all the time, the light dimmer, even if it 
wos just past nones. The day was approaching its sunset, and we had very little time left.

"It is late,” William said, “and when a man has little time, he must take care to maintain his 
calm. We must act as if we had eternity before us. I have a problem to solve: how to penetrate the 
finis Africae, because the final answer must be there. Then we must save some person, I have not 
yet determined which. Finally, we should expect something from the direction of the stables, which 
you will keep an eye on. ... Look at all the bustle. ”


In fact, the space between the Aedificium and the cloister was unusually animated. A moment before, 
a novice, coming from †he abbo†’s house, had run †oward †he Aedificium. Now Nicholas was coming ou† 
of it, heading for the dormitories. In one corner, that mornings group, Pacificus, Aymaro, and 
Peter, were deep in discussion with Alinardo, as if trying to convince him of something.

Then they seemed to reach a decision. Aymaro supported the still-reluctant Alinardo, and went with 
him toward the abbatial residence. They were just entering as Nicholas came out of the dormitory, 
leading Jorge in the same direction. Seeing the two Italians enter, he whispered something into 
Jorge's eor, and the old man shook his head. They continued, however, toward the chapter house.

“The abbot is taking the situation in hand ...” William murmured skeptically. From the Aedificium 
were emerging more monks, who belonged in the scriptorium, and they were immediately followed by 
Benno, who came toword us, more worried thon ever.

“There is unrest in the scriptorium,” he told us. “Nobody is working, they are oll talking among 
themselves.  What is happening*”

“What's happening is thot the people who until this morning seemed the most suspect ore oll dead. 
Until yesterday everyone was on guard against Berengar, foolish and treacherous and lascivious, 
then the cellarer, a suspect heretic, and finally Malachi, so generally disliked.  Now they don‘t 
know whom
to be on guard against, and they urgently need to find qn enemy, or a scapegoat. And eqch suspects 
the others; some are afroid, like you; others have decided to frighten someone else. You are all 
too agitated. Adso, take a look at the stables every now and then. I am going to get some rest.”

I should have been amazed: to go and rest when he had only a few hours left did not seem the wisest 
decision. Bu† by now I knew my mas†er. The more relaxed his body, †he more ebullien† his mind.

BETWEEN VESPERS AND COMPLINE
In which long hours of bewildermen† are briefly narrated.

It is difficult for me to narrate what happened in the hours that followed, between vespers and 
compline.

William was absent. I roamed around the stables but noticed nothing abnormal. The grooms were 
bringing in the animals, made nervous by the wind; otherwise all was calm.

I entered the church. Everyone was already in his place among the stalls, but the abbot noticed 
Jorge was absent. With a gesture he delayed the beginning of the office. He called for Benno, to 
dispatch him to look for the old man, but Benno was not there. Someone pointed out that he was 
probably making the scriptorium ready for its evening closing. The abbot, annoyed, said it had been 
decided thot Benno would close nothing because he did not know the rules. Aymaro of Alessandria 
rose from his stall: “If Your Paternity agrees, I will go and summon him.  ”


“No one asked any†hin9 f you,” †he abbo† said cur†Iy, and Aymaro sa† back down in his place, not 
without casting an inscrutable glance at Pacificus of Tivoli. The abbot called for Nicholas, who 
was not present. Someone reminded him that Nicholas was preparing supper, and the abbot made a 
gesture of annoyance, as if he were displeased to reveal to all that he was upset.
“I want Jorge here,” he cried. “Find him! You go!” he ordered the master of novices.
Another pointed out to him that Alinardo was also missing. “I know,” the abbot said, “he is not 
well.” I was near Peter of Sant’AIbono and heard him say to his neighbor, Gunzo of Nola, in a 
vulgar dialect from central Italy which I partly understood, “I should think so. Today, when he 
came out after the colloquy, the poor old man was distraught. Abo behaves like the whore of 
Avignon!”

The novices were bewildered; with their innocent, boyish sensitivity they felt the tension reigning 
in choir, as I felt it. Long moments of silence and embarrassment ensued. The abbot ordered some 
psalms to be recited and he picked at random three that were not prescribed for vespers by the 
Rule. All looked at one another, then began praying in low voices. The novice master came back, 
followed by Benno, who took his seat, his heqd bowed. Jorge wqs not in the scriptorium or in his 
cell. The abbot commanded †ha† †he office begin.

When it was over, before everyone headed for supper, I went to call William. He was stretched out 
on his pallet, dressed, motionless. He sqid he had not realized it was so late. I told him briefly 
what had hoppened. He shook his head.

At the door of the refectory we saw Nicholas, who a few hours earlier had been accompanying Jorge. 
William asked him whether the old man had gone in immediately to see the abbot. Nicholas said Jorge 
hqd had to wait a long time outside the door, because Alinardo and Aymaro of Alessandriq were in 
the hall. After Jorge was received, he remained inside for some time, while Nicholas waited for 
him. Then he came out and asked Nicholas to accompany him to the church, still deserted an hour 
before vespers.

The abbo† saw us talking wi†h †he cellarer. “gro†her William,” he admonished, “ore you s†iII 
investigating*” He bade William sit at his table, as usual. For Benedictines hospitality is sacred.

The supper was more silent than usual, and sod. The obbot ate listlessly, oppressed by grim 
thoughts. At the end he told the monks to hurry to compline.

Alinardo and Jorge were still absent. The monks pointed to the blind man's empty place and 
whispered. When the office was finished, the abbot asked all to soy a special prayer for the health 
of Jorge of BUP9 *. It was not clear whether he meant physical health or eternal health. All 
understood that ct new calamity was abou† †o befall †he community. Then †he abbo† ordered each monk 
†o hurry, wi†h greater alacrity than usual, to his own pallet. He commanded that no one, and he 
emphasized the words “no one,” should remain in circulation outside the dormitory. The frightened 
novices were the first to leave, cowls over their faces, heads bowed, without exchanging the 
remarks, the nudges, the flashing smiles, the sly and concealed trippings with which they usually 
provoked one another (for novices, though young monks, are still boys, and the reproaches of their 
master are of little avail in preventing them all from behaving like boys, as their tender age 
demands).



When †he aduI†s filed ou†, I fell in†o line, unobtrusively, behind †he group †ha† by now had been 
characterized to me as "the Italians.” Pacificus was murmuring to Aymaro, “Do you really believe 
Abo doesn't know where Jorge is*” And Aymaro answered, "He might know, and know that from where 
Jorge is he will never return. Perhaps the old man wanted too much, and Abo no longer wants him.  "

As William and I pretended to retire to the pilgrims' hospice, we glimpsed the abbot re-entering 
the Aedificium through the still-open door of the refectory. William advised waiting a while: once 
the grounds were empty of every presence, he told me to follow him. We rapidly crossed the empty 
area and entered the church.

AFTER COMPLINE
In which, almost by chance, William discovers the secret of entering the finis Africae.

Like a pair of qssqssins, we lurked neqr the entrance, behind q column, whence we could observe the 
chapel with the skulls.

"Abo has gone to close the Aedificium,” William said. "When he has barred the doors from the 
inside, he can only come out through the ossarium.”
"And then*"
“And then we will see what he does.”

We did not discover what he did. An hour went by and he still had not reappeared. He's gone into 
the finis Africae, I said. Perhaps, William answered. Eager to formulate more hypotheses, I added: 
Perhaps he come out agoin through the refectory and has gone to look for Jorge. And William 
answered: Thqt is qlso possible. Perhaps Jorge is already dead, I imagined further. Perhaps he is 
to the Aedificium and is killing the abbot. Perhaps they are both in some other place ond some 
other person is lying in wait for them. What did "the Italians" want* And why was Benno so 
frightened* Was it perhaps only a mask he had assumed, to mislead us* Why had he lingered in the 
scriptorium during vespers, if he didn't know how to close the scriptorium or how to get out* Did 
he want to essay the passages of the labyrinth*

"All is possible,” William said. "But only one thing is happening, or has happened, or is about to 
happen. And ot last divine Providence is endowing us with a radiont certitude.“
"What is that*” I asked, full of hope.
"That Brother William of Baskerville, who now has the impression of having understood everything, 
does not know how to enter the finis Africae. To the stables, Adso, to the stables.”

“And wha† if †he abbo† finds us*“



“We will pretend †o be q pair of ghos†s.”

To me †his did no† seem a practical solution, bu† I kep† silen†. William was growing uneasy. We 
came out of the north door and crossed the cemetery, while the wind was whistling loudly and I 
begged the Lord not to mqke us encounter two ghosts, for the abbey, on that night, did not lack for 
souls in
†ormen†. We reached †he stables and heard †he horses, more nervous †han ever because of †he fury of 
the elements. The main door of the building had, at the level of a man‘s chest, a broad metal 
grating, through which the interior could be seen. In the darkness we discerned the forms of the 
horses. I recognized Brunellus, the first on the left. To his right, the third animal in line 
roised his head, sensing our presence, and whinnied. I smiled. "Tertius equi," I said.

"Wha†*” William osked.

“Nothing. I was remembering poor Salvatore. He wanted to perform God knows what ma9ic with that 
horse, and with his Latin he called him "tertius equi: Which would be the u.”

"The u*” asked William, who hqd hectrd my prattle without paying much attention to it.

“Yes, because ’tertius equi' does not mean the third horse, but the third of the horse, and the 
third letter of the word 'equus’ is u. But this is all nonsense. “

William looked ot me, and in the darkness I seemed to see his face transformed. “God bless you, 
Adso!“ he said to me. “Why, of course, suppositio material is, the discourse is presumed de dicto 
and not de re. ... What a fool I am!” He gave himself such a great blow on the forehead that I 
heard a clap, and I believe he hurt himself. "My boy, this is the second time todoy that wisdom hos 
spoken through your mouth, first in dream qnd now waking! Run, run to your cell qnd fetch the lamp, 
or, rather, both the lomps we hid. Let no one see you, and join me in church at once! Ask no 
questions! Go!”

I asked no questions and went. The lamps were under my bed, already filled with oil, and I had 
taken care to trim them in advance. I hqd the flint in my hqbit. With the two precious instruments 
clutched
†o my ches†, I ran in†o †he church.
William was under the tripod and was rereading the parchment with Venantius's notes.

"Adso,” he said to me, “ 'primum et septimum de quatuor’ does not mean the first and seventh of 
four, but of the four, the word ’four'!” For a moment I still did not understand, but then I was 
enlightened: "Super thronos viginti quatuor! The writing! The verse! The words are carved over the 
mirror!”
"Come," William said, “perhaps we are still in time to save a life!”
"Whose*” I asked, as he was manipulating the skulls and opening the passage to the ossarium.

“The life of someone who does not deserve it,“ he soid. We were alreody in the underground postage, 
our lomps olight, moving toward the door that led to the kitchen.


I said before that at this point you pushed a wooden door and found yourself in the kitchen, behind 
the fireplace, at the foot of the circular staircase that led to the scriptorium. And just as we 
were pushing that door, we heard to our left some muffled sounds within the wall. They came from 
the wall beside †he door, where †he row of niches wi†h skulls and bones ended. Instead of a las† 
niche, †here was a stretch of blqnk wall of large squctred blocks of stone, with an old plaque in 
the center that hctd some worn monograms carved on it. The sounds came, it seemed, from behind the 
plaque, or else from above the plaque, partly beyond the wall, and partly almost over our heads.
If something of the sort had happened the first night, I would immediately hove thought of dead
monks. But by now I tended to expect worse from living monks. “Who can that be*” I asked.

William opened the door and emerged behind the fireplace. The blows were heard also along the wall 
thot flanked the stairs, as if someone were prisoner inside the wall, or else in that thickness 
(truly vast) that presumably existed between the inner wall of the kitchen and the outer wall of 
the south
†ower.

“Someone is shut up inside there,” William said. “I have wondered all along whether there were not 
another access to the finis Africoe, in this Aedificium so full of possages. Obviously there is. 
From
†he ossarium, before you come up in†o †he kitchen, a s†re†ch of wall opens, and you climb up a 
staircase parallel to this, concealed in the wall, which leads right to the blind room.”
“But who is in there*”

“The second person. One is in the finis Africae, another has tried to reach him, but the one above 
must have blocked the mechanism that controls the entrances. So the visitor is trapped. And he is 
making a great stir because, I imagine, there cannot be much air in that narrow space.”

“Who is it* We must save him!”

“We shall soon know who it is. And qs for saving him, thqt can only be done by releasing the 
mechanism from above: we don‘t know the secret at this end. Let's hurry upstoirs.”

So we went up to the scriptorium, and from there to the labyrinth, and we quickly reached the south 
tower. Twice I had to curb my haste, because the wind that came through the slits that night 
created currents that, penetrating those passages, blew moaning through the rooms, rustling the 
scattered pages on the desks, so that I had to shield the flame with my hand.

Soon we were in the mirror room, this time prepared for the game of distortion awaiting us. We 
roised the lqmps to illuminate the verse thqt surmounted the frqme. Super thronos viginti quatuor 
... At this point the secret was quite clear: the word “quatuor” has seven letters, and we hod to 
press on the q
ond†he r. I†hou9h†,inmyexc†emen†,†odo i†myself: I ropdlyse††helomp downon†he†obein†he center of the 
room. But I did this nervously, and the flame began to lick the binding of a book also set there.

“Watch out, idiot!” William cried, and with a puff blew out the flame. “You want to set fire to the 
library*”



I apologized and started to light the lamp again. "It doesn't matter,” William said, "mine is 
enough. Take it and give me light, because the legend is too high and you couldn't reach it. We 
must hurry.”

“And whqt if there is somebody qrmed in there*" I qsked, qs William, qlmost groping, sought the 
fatal letters, standing on tiptoe, tall as he wos, to touch the apocalyptic verse.

"Give me light, by the Devil, and never fear: God is with us!” he answered me, somewhat 
incoherently. His fingers were touching the q of "quatuor," and, standing a few paces back, I saw 
better than he what he was doin9. I have already said that the letters of the verses seemed carved 
or incised in the wall: apparently those of the word "quatuor” were metal outlines, behind which a 
wondrous mechanism had been placed and walled up. When it was pushed forward, the q made a kind of 
sharp click, and the some thing happened when William pressed on the r. The whole frome of the 
mirror seemed to shudder, and the glass surface snapped back. The mirror was a door, hinged on its 
left side. William slipped his hand into the opening now created between the right edge and the 
wall, and pulled toward himself. Creaking, the door opened out, in our direction. William slipped 
through the opening and I scuttled behind him, the lamp high over my head.

Two hours after compline, at the end of the sixth day, in the heart of the night that was giving 
birth to the seventh day, we entered the finis Africae.

SEVENTH DAY

NIGHT
In which, if it were to summarize the prodigious revelations of which it speaks, the title would 
have to be as long as the chapter itself, controry to usage.

We found ourselves on the threshold of a room similar in shape to the other three heptagonal blind 
rooms, dominated by a strong musty odor, as of mildewed books. The lamp, which I held up high, 
first illuminated the vault; then, as I moved my arm downward, to right and left, the flame cast a 
vague ligh† on the dis†on† shelves along the walls. Finally, in the center, we sow a table covered 
with papers, and behind the table a seated figure, who seemed to be writing for us in the darkness, 
immobile, if he was still alive. Even before the light revealed his face, William spoke.
“Happy night, venerable Jorge,” he said. “Were you waiting for us*“

The lamp now, once we had taken a few steps forword, illuminoted the face of the old mon, looking 
at us as if he could see.

“Is that you, Williom of Baskerville*” he asked. "I have been waiting for you since this ofternoon 
before vespers, when I came and closed myself in here. I knew you would orrive.“
"And the abbot*" William asked. “Is he the one making that noise in the secret stairway*”



Jorge hesitated for o moment. “Is he still olive*” he asked. “I thought he would already hove
suffocated.”
“Before we start talking,” William said, “I would like to save him. You can open from this side.”
“No,” Jorge said wearily, “not any longer. The mechanism is controlled from below, by pressing on 
the plaque, and up here a lever snaps, which opens a door back there, behind that case.” He nodded 
over his shoulder. “Next to the case you could see a wheel with some counterweights, which controls 
the mechanism from up here. But when I heard the wheel turning, a sign that Abo had entered down 
below, I yanked at the rope thot holds the weights, and the rope broke. Now the passage is closed 
on both sides, and you could never repair †ha† device. The abbo† is dead.”

“Why did you kill him*”

“Todoy, when he sent for me, he told me that thanks to you he had discovered everything. He did not 
yet know what I had been trying to protect—he has never precisely understood the treasures and the 
ends of †he library. He asked me †o explain wha† he did no† know. He wan†ed †he finis Africae †o be 
opened. The Italians had asked him to put an end to what they call the mystery kept alive by me and 
my predecessors. They are driven by the lust for new things.  ”

“And you no doub† promised him you would come here and pu† an end †o your life as you had pu† an 
end to the lives of the others, in such a way that the abbey's honor would be saved and no one 
would know anything. Then you told him the way to come, later, and check. But instead you waited 
for him, to kill him. Didn't you think he might enter through the mirror*”

“No, Abo is †oo shor†; he would never have been able †o reach †he verse by himself. I †oId him 
obou† the other passage, which I alone still knew. It is the one I used for so many years, because 
it was simpler in the darkness. I hod only to reach the chopel, then follow the bones of the deod 
to the end of the passage.”

“So you had him come here, knowing you would kill him. ”

“I could no longer trust him. He was frightened. He had become famous becouse at Fossanova he 
managed to get a body down some circular stairs. Undeserved glory. Now he is dead because he was 
unable †o climb his own stairway.”

“You hove been using it for forty years. When you realized you were going blind and would no longer 
be able to control †he library, you ac†ed shrewdly. You hctd a mon you could †rus† elected abbo†; 
and as librarian you firs† had him name Rober† of Bobbio, whom you could direc† as you liked, and 
†hen Malachi, who needed your help and never took a step without consulting you. For forty years 
you have been master of this abbey. This is what the Italian group realized, this is what Alinardo 
kept repeating, bu† no one would Iis†en †o him because †hey considered him mad by now. Am I righ†* 
Bu† you were still awaiting me, and you couldn‘t block the mirror entrance, because the mechanism 
is set in the wall. Why were you waiting for me* How could you be sure I would arrive*” William 
asked, but


from his tone it was clear he had already guessed the answer qnd was expecting it as a reward for 
his own skill.

“From the first day I realized you would understand. From your voice, from the way you drew me to 
debate on a subject I did not want mentioned. You were better than the others: you would have 
arrived at the solution no matter what. You know that it suffices to think and to reconstruct in 
one's own mind the thoughts of the other. And then I heard you were asking the other monks 
questions, all of them the right ones. But you never asked questions about the library, as if you 
already knew its every secret. One night I came and knocked at your cell, and you were not in. You 
had to be here. Two lamps had disappeared from the kitchen, I heard a servant say. And finally, 
when Severinus came to
†alk †o you abou† a book †he o†her day in †he narthex, I was sure you were on my †roiI.”
“But you managed to get the book away from me. You went to Malachi, who had had no idea of the 
situation. In his jealousy, the fool was still obsessed with the idea that Adelmo had stolen his 
beloved Berengar, who by then craved younger flesh. Malachi didn't understand what Venantius had to 
do with this business, and you confused his thinking even further. You probably told him Berengar 
had been intimate with Severinus, and qs a rewqrd Severinus had given him q book from the finis 
Africae; I don’† know exactly who† you told him. Crazed with jealousy, Malachi wen† to Severinus 
and killed him. Then he didn‘† have †ime †o hun† for †he book you had described †o him, because †he 
cellarer arrived. Is that what happened*”
“More or less.”
“But you didn‘t want Malachi to die. He had probably never looked at the books of the finis 
Africae, for he trusted you, respected your prohibitions. He confined himself to arranging the 
herbs at evening to frighten any intruders. Severinus supplied him with them. This is why Severinus 
let Malachi enter the infirmary the other day: it was his regular visit to collect the fresh herbs 
he prepared daily, by the abbot‘s order. Have I guessed*”

“You hqve guessed. I did not want Malachi to die. I told him to find the book qgain, by whatever 
means, and bring it back here without opening it. I told him it had the power of a thousand 
scorpions. But for the first time the madman chose to act on his own initiative. I did not want him 
to die: he was a faithful agent. But do not repeat to me what you know: I know that you know. I do 
not want to feed your pride; you already see to that on your own. I heard you this morning in the 
scriptorium
questioning Benno about the Coena Cypriani. You were very close to the truth. I do not know how you 
discovered the secret of the mirror, but when I learned from the abbot that you had mentioned the 
finis Africae, I was sure you would come shortly. This is why I was waiting for you. So, now, what 
do you want*”
“I want,” William said, "to see the last manuscript of the bound volume that contains on Arabic 
text, a Syriac one, and an interpretation or a transcription of the Coena Cypriani. I want to see 
that copy in Greek, made perhaps by an Arab, or by a Spaniard, that you found when, as assistant to 
Paul of Rimini, you arranged to be sent back to your country to collect the finest manuscripts of 
the Apocalypse in Leon and Castile, a booty thot made you famous and respected here in the abbey 
and caused you to win the post of librarian, which rightfully belonged to Alinardo, ten years your 
senior. I want to see that Greek copy written on linen paper, which was then very rare and was 
manufactured in Silos, near


BUP9 *. y€IUr home. I want to see the book you stole there qfter reading it, to keep others from 
reading it, and you hid it here, protecting it cleverly, and you did not destroy it because a man 
like you does not destroy a book, but simply guards it and makes sure no one touches it. I want to 
see the second book of †he Poe†ics of Aris†o†le, †he book everyone has believed los† or never 
wri††en, and of which you hold perhctps the only copy."

“What a magnificent librarian you would have been, William,” Jorge said, with a tone at once 
admiring and regretful. “So you know everything. Come, I believe there is a stool on your side of 
the table. Sit. Here is your prize.”

William sat ond put down the lamp, which I had handed him, illuminating Jorge's face from below. 
The old man took a volume that lay before him and passed it to William. I recognized the binding: 
it was the book I hod opened in the infirmary, thinking it on Arabic manuscript.

“Read i†, †hen, leaf through i†, William,” Jorge soid. “You have won.”

William looked ctt the volume but did not touch it. From his hctbit he took ct pair of gloves, not 
his usual mitts with the fingertips exposed, but the ones Severinus was wearing when we found him 
dead.
Slowly he opened the worn and fragile binding. I came closer and bent over his shoulder. Jorge, 
with his sensitive hearing, caught the noise I made. “Are you here, too, boy*” he said. “I will 
show it to you, too ... afterward.”

William rapidly glanced over the first pages. “It is an Arabic manuscript on the sayings of some 
fool, according to the catalogue,” he said. “What is it*”

“Oh, silly legends of the infidels, which hold that fools utter clever remarks thqt amaze even 
their priests and delight their caliphs . “

“The second is a Syriac manuscrip†, bu† according to the catalogue i† is the translation of a 
little
Egyptian book on alchemy. How does i† hoppen †o be in †his collection*”

“It is an Egyptian work from the third century of our era. Coherent with the work that follows, but 
less dangerous. No one would lend an ear to the savings of an African alchemist. He attributes the 
creation of the world to divine laughter. ” He raised his foce and recited, with the prodigious
memory of a reader who for forty years now had been repeating to himself things read when he still 
had the gift of sight: " ’The moment God laughed seven gods were born who governed the world, the 
moment he burst out laughing light appeared, at his second laugh appeared water, and on the seventh 
day of his laughing appeared the soul. ’ Folly. Likewise the work thot comes after, by one of the
countless idiots who set themselves to glossing the Coena  But these are not what interest you."

William, in fact, had rapidly passed over the pages and had come to the Greek text. I saw 
immediately that the pages were of a different, softer material, the first almost worn away, with a 
part of the margin consumed, spattered with pale stains, such as time ond dampness usually produce 
on other books. William read the opening lines, first in Greek, then translating into Lotin, and 
then he continued in this language so that I, too, could learn how the fatal book began:


In the first book we deqlt with tragedy qnd saw how, by arousing pity qnd feqr, it produces 
catharsis, the purification of those feelings. As we promised, we will now deal with comedy (as 
well as with satire and mime) and see how, in inspiring the pleasure of the ridiculous, it arrives 
at the purification of that passion. Tha† such passion is mos† wor†hy of consideration we have 
already said in †he book on †he soul, inasmuch as—ctlone among the ctnimals—man is capable of 
laughter. We will then define the type of actions of which comedy is †he mimesis, †hen we will 
examine †he means by which comedy excites laughter, and these means are actions and speech. We will 
show how the ridiculousness of actions is born from the likening of the best to the worst and vice 
versa, from arousing surprise through deceit, from the impossible, from violation of the laws of 
nature, from the irrelevant and the inconsequent, from the debasing of the characters, from the use 
of comical and vulgar pantomime, from disharmony, from the choice of the least worthy things. We 
will then show how the ridiculousness of speech is born from the misunderstandings of similar words 
for different things and different words for similar things, from gorrulity and repetition, from 
play on words, from diminutives, from errors of pronunciation, and from barbarisms.

William translated with some difficulty, seeking the right words, pausing now and then. As he 
translated he smiled, as if he recognized things he was expecting to find. He read the first page 
aloud, then stopped, as if he were not interested in knowing more, ond rapidly leafed through the 
following pages. But after a few pages he encountered resistance, because near the upper corner of 
the side edge, and along the top, some pages had stuck together, as happens when the damp and 
deteriorating papery substance forms a kind of sticky paste. Jorge realized that the rustle of 
pages hod ceased, and he urged William on.
“Go on, read it, leaf through it. It is yours, you have earned it.”
William laughed, seeming rctther amused. “Then it is not true that you consider me so clever, 
Jorge! You canno† see: I have gloves on. Wi†h my fingers made clumsy like †his, I canno† de†och one 
page from the next. I should proceed with bare hands, moistening my fingers with my tongue, as I 
happened to do this morning while reading in the scriptorium, so thot suddenly that mystery also 
became clear
†o me. And I should go on leafing like †ha† un†il a good portion of †he poison hctd passed †o my 
mou†h. I am speaking of †he poison †ha† you, one day long ago, †ook from †he laboratory of 
Severinus. Perhaps you were already worried then, because you had heard someone in the scriptorium 
display curiosity, ei†her abou† †he finis Africae or abou† †he los† book of Aris†o†le, or abou† 
bo†h. I believe you kep† the ampoule for a long time, planning to use it the moment you sensed 
danger. And you sensed that days ago, when Venantius cctme too close to the subject of this book, 
and ctt the same time Berengar, heedless, vain, trying to impress Adelmo, showed he was less 
secretive than you had hoped. So you came and set your trap. Just in time, because a few nights 
later Venantius got in, stole the book, and avidly leafed through it, with an almost physical 
voracity. He soon felt ill and ran to seek help in the kitchen. Where he died. Am I mistaken*”

“No. Go on.”

“The rest is simple. Berengar finds Venontius's body in the kitchen, feors there will be an 
inquiry, because, after all, Venantius got into the Aedificium at night thanks to Berengar’s prior 
revelation to Adelmo. He doesn‘t know what to do; he loads the body on his shoulders and flings it 
into the jar of blood, thinking everyone will be convinced Venan†ius drowned.”



“And how do you know that was what happened*”
“You know it as well. I saw how you reacted when they found a cloth stained with Berengar's blood. 
With that cloth the foolhardy man had wiped his hands qfter putting Venantius in the jar. But since 
Berengar had disappeared, he could only have disappeared with the book, which by this point had 
aroused his curiosity, too. And you were expecting him to be found somewhere, not bloodstained but 
poisoned. The rest is clear. Severinus finds the book, because Berengar went first to the infirmary 
to read it, safe from indiscreet eyes. Malachi, at your instigation, kills Severinus, then dies 
himself when he comes back here to discover what was so forbidden about the object that had made 
him a murderer. And thus we have an explanation for all the corpses. ... What a fool ...”
“Who*”
“1. Because of a remark of Alinardo's, I was convinced the series of crimes followed the sequence 
of the seven trumpets of the Apocalypse. Hail for Adelmo, and his death was a suicide. Blood for 
Venantius, and there it hqd been a bizarre notion of Berengar's: wqter for Berengar himself, and it 
hod been a random act; the third part of the sky for Severinus, and Malochi hod struck him with the 
armillary sphere because it was the only thing he found handy. And finally scorpions for Malachi ..
Why did you tell him that the book had the power of a thousand scorpions*”

“Because of you. Alinardo had †oId me abou† his idea, and †hen I heard from someone †ho† you, †oo, 
found it persuasive.  I became convinced that a divine plan was directing these deaths, for which I
was no† responsible. And I †oId Malachi †ha† if he were †o become curious he would perish in 
accordance with the same divine plan: and so he did.”

“So, then ... I conceived a false pattern to interpret the moves of the guilty mon, and the guilty 
mon fell in with it. And it was this same false pattern that put me on your trail. Everyone 
nowadays is obsessed with the book of John, but you seemed to me the one who pondered it most, and 
not so much because of your speculations ctbou† †he An†ichris† as becctuse you came from †he 
country †ha† has produced the mos† splendid Apocalypses. One day somebody told me i† was you who 
had brough† the mos† beautiful codices of †his book †o †he library. Then, another day, Alinardo was 
raving abou† a mysterious enemy who had been sent to seek books in Silos (my curiosity was piqued 
when he said this enemy had returned prematurely into the realm of darkness: at first it might have 
seemed the man he was speaking of had died young, but he was referring to your blindness). Silos is 
near Burgos, and this morning, in the catalogue, I found a series of acquisitions, all of them 
Spanish Apocalypses, from the period when you had succeeded or were about to succeed Paul of 
Rimini. And in that group of acquisitions there was this book also. But I couldn't be positive of 
my reconstruction until I learned thot the stolen book was on linen pctper. Then I remembered 
Silos, and I was sure. Naturally, as the ideo of this book and its venomous power gradually began 
to take shape, the idea of an apocalyptic pattern began to collapse, though I couldn‘t understand 
how both the book and the sequence of the
†rumpe†s pointed †o you. Bu† I understood †he s†ory of †he book be††er because, directed by †he 
apocalyptic pattern, I was forced more and more to think of you, and your debates about laughter. 
So thot this evening, when I no longer believed in the apocalyptic pattern, I insisted on watching 
the stables, and in the stables, by pure chance, Adso gave me the key to entering the finis 
Africae.”


I cannot follow you," Jorge soid. “You are proud to show me how, following the dictcttes of your 
reason, you arrived a† me, and ye† you hove shown me you arrived here by following a false 
reasoning. Wha† do you mean to say to me*”
“To you, nothing. I am disconcerted, that is all. But it is of no matter. I am here.”
“The Lord was sounding the seven trumpets. And you, even in your error, heard a confused echo of 
that sound.”

“You said this yesterday evening in your sermon. You are trying to convince yourself that this 
whole story proceeded according to a divine plan, in order to conceal from yourself the fact that 
you are a murderer.”
“I have killed no one. Each died according to his destiny because of his sins. I was only an 
instrument.”
“Yesterday you said that Judas also was an instrument. That does not prevent him from being 
damned.”

“I accept the risk of damnation. The Lord will absolve me, because He knows I acted for His glory. 
My du†y was †o pro†ec† †he library.”

“A few minutes ago you were ready †o kill me, †oo, and also †his boy. ”

“You are subtler, but no better than the others.”
“And now whqt will happen, now thqt I have eluded the trap*”
“We shall see,” Jorge answered. “I do not necessarily want your death; perhaps I will succeed in 
convincing you. But first tell me: how did you guess it wos the second book of Aristotle*”

"Your anathemas against laughter would surely not have been enough for me, or what little I learned 
about your argument with the others. At first I didn't understand their significance. But there 
were references to a shameless stone that rolls over the plain, and to cicadas that will sing from 
the ground, to venerable fig trees. I had already read something of the sort: I verified it during 
these past few days. These are examples that Aristotle used in the first book of the Poetics, and 
in the Rhetoric. Then I remembered that Isidore of Seville defines comedy as something that tells 
of stupra virginum et amores meretricum—how shall I put it*—of less than virtuous loves. ... 
Gradually this second book took shape in my mind as it had to be. I could tell you almost all of 
it, without reading the pctges that were meant to poison me. Comedy is born from the komai—that is, 
from the peasant villages—as a joyous celebration after a meal or a feast. Comedy does not tell of 
famous and powerful men, but of base and ridiculous creatures, though not wicked; and it does not 
end with the death of the protagonists. It achieves the effect of the ridiculous by showing the 
defects and vices of
ordinary men. Here Aristotle sees the tendency to laughter as a force for good, which can also have 
an instructive value: through witty riddles and unexpected metaphors, though it tells us things 
differently from the way they are, as if it were lying, it actually obliges us to examine them more 
closely, and it makes us say: Ah, this is just how things are, and I didn't know it. Truth reached 
by


depictin9men ctnd the world as worse than they are or than we believe them to be, worse in any case 
than the epics, the tragedies, lives of the saints have shown them to us. Is that it*”

“Fairly close. You recons†ruc†ed i† by reading o†her books*”

“Many of which Venan†ius was working on. I believe Venan†ius had been hunting for †his book for 
some time. He must have read in the catalogue the indications I also read, and must have been 
convinced this was the book he was seeking. But he didn't know how to enter the finis Africae. When 
he heard Berengar speak of it with Adelmo, then he was off like a dog on the track of a hare.”

“That is what happened. I understood at once. I realized the moment had come when I would have to 
defend the library tooth and nail. ”
“And you spread the ointment. It must have been a hard task ... in the dark. ”
“By now my hands see more than your eyes. I had token a brush from Severinus, and I also used 
gloves. I† was a good idea, was i† no†* I† †ook you a long †ime †o arrive a† i†. ”

“Yes. I was thinking of a more complex device, a poisoned pin or something of the sort. I must say 
that your solution was exemplary: the victim poisoned himself when he was alone, and only to the 
extent that he wanted to read. ”

I realized, with a shudder, that at this moment these two men, arrayed in a mortal conflict, were 
admiring each other, as if each had acted only to win the other's applause. The thought crossed my 
mind thot he artifices Berengar used to seduce Adelmo, and the simple and natural acts with which 
the girl had aroused my passion qnd my desire, were nothing compctred with the cleverness and mqd 
skill each used to conquer the other, nothing compared with the act of seduction going on before my 
eyes at that moment, which had unfolded over seven days, each of the two interlocutors making, as 
it were, mysterious appointments with the other, each secretly aspiring to the other's approbation, 
each fearing ctnd hating the other.

“But now tell me,” William was saying, “why* Why did you want to shield this book more than so many 
o†hers* Why did you hide—†hough no† a† †he price of crime—†rea†ises on necromancy, pages †ha† may 
hove blasphemed against the nome of God, while for these pages you damned your brothers and have 
damned yourself* There ctre many other books that speak of comedy, many others that praise 
laughter. Why did this one fill you with such fear*”
“Because it was by the Philosopher. Every book by that mon has destroyed a part of the learning 
that Christianity hctd accumulated over the centuries. The fathers hctd said everything thctt 
needed to be known obou† †he power of †he Word, bu† †hen Boe†hius had only †o gloss †he Philosopher 
and †he divine mystery of the Word was transformed into a human parody of categories and syllogism. 
The book of Genesis says wha† has †o be known abou† †he composition of †he cosmos, bu† i† sufficed 
†o rediscover †he Physics of †he Philosopher †o have †he universe reconceived in †erms of dull and 
slimy matter, and the Arab Averroes almost convinced everyone of the eternity of the world. We knew 
everything abou† †he divine names, and †he Dominican buried by Abo—seduced by †he Philosopher— 
renamed them, following the proud paths of natural reason. And so the cosmos, which for the



Areopagite revealed itself to those who knew how to look up at the luminous cascade of the 
exemplary first cause, has become a preserve of terrestrial evidence for which they refer to an 
abstract agent. Before, we used to look to heaven, deigning only a frowning glance at the mire of 
matter: now we look at the earth, and we believe in the heavens because of earthly testimony. Every 
word of the Philosopher, by whom now even saints and prophets swear, has overturned the image of 
the world. But he had not succeeded in overturning the image of God. If this book were to become 
... had become an object for open interpretation, we would have crossed the last boundary.“
“But what frightened you in this discussion of laughter* You cannot eliminate laughter by 
eliminating
†he book.”
“No, to be sure. But laughter is weakness, corruption, the foolishness of our flesh. It is the 
peasant's entertainment, the drunkard's license; even the church in her wisdom has granted the 
moment of feast, carnival, fair, this diurnal pollution that releases humors and distracts from 
other desires and other ambitions. ... Still, laughter remains base, a defense for the simple, a 
mystery desecrated for the plebeians. The apostle also said as much: it is better to marry than to 
burn. Rather than rebel against God's estctblished order, laugh qnd enjoy your foul pctrodies of 
order, ctt the end of the mectl, after you have drained jugs and flasks. Elect the king of fools, 
lose yourselves in the liturgy of the ass and the pig, play at performing your saturnalia head 
down. ... But here, here“—now Jorge struck the table with his finger, near the book William was 
holding open—“here the function of laughter is reversed, it is elevated to art, the doors of the 
world of the learned qre opened to it, it becomes the objec† of philosophy, and of perfidious 
theology.  You sow yesterday how †he simple can conceive and
carry out the most lurid heresies, disavowing the laws of God and the laws of nature. But the 
church can deal with the heresy of the simple, who condemn themselves on their own, destroyed by 
their ignorance. The ignorant madness of Dolcino and his like will never cause a crisis in the 
divine order. He will prectch violence and will die of violence, will lectve no trace, will be 
consumed cts carnival is consumed, and it does not matter whether during the feast the epiphany of 
the world upside down will be produced on earth for a brief time. Provided the act is not 
transformed into plan, provided this vulgar tongue does not find a Latin that translates it. 
Laughter frees the villein from fear of the Devil, becctuse in the feqst of fools the Devil qlso 
ctppectrs poor ctnd foolish, and therefore controllable. But this book could teach that freeing 
oneself of the fear of the Devil is wisdom. When he laughs, as the wine gurgles in his throat, the 
villein feels he is master, because he has overturned his position with respect to his lord; but 
this book could teach learned men the clever and, from that moment, illustrious artifices thot 
could legitimotize the reversal. Then what in the villein is still, fortunately, on operation of 
the belly would be transformed into an opercttion of the brain. That laughter is proper to man is a 
sign of our limitation, sinners that we are. But from this book many corrupt minds like yours would 
draw the extreme syllogism, whereby laughter is man's end! Laughter, for a few moments, distracts 
the villein from fear. But law is imposed by fear, whose true nome is fear of God. This book could 
s†rike †he Luciferine spark †hq† would se† a new fire †o †he whole world, nnd laughter would be 
defined as the new art, unknown even to Prometheus, for canceling fear. To the villein who laughs, 
at that moment, dying does not matter: but then, when the license is past, the liturgy again 
imposes on him, according to the divine plan, the fear of death. And from this book there could be 
born the new destructive aim to destroy death through redemption from fear. And what would we be, 
we sinful creatures, without fear, perhaps the most foresighted, the most loving of the divine 
gifts* For centuries the doctors and the fathers have, secreted perfumed essences of holy learning 
to redeem, through the thought of that which is lofty, the wretchedness and temptation of that 
which is base.


And this book—considering comedy a wondrous medicine, with its sqtire and mime, which would produce 
the purification of the passions through the enactment of defect, fault, weakness—would induce 
false scholars to try to redeem the lofty with a diabolical reversal: through the acceptance of the 
base. This book could prompt the idea that man can wish to have on earth (as your Bacon suggested 
with regqrd to natural magic) the abundance of the land of Cockaigne. But this is what we cannot 
and must not have. Look at the young monks who shamelessly read the parodizing buffoonery of the 
Coena Cypriani. What a diabolical transfiguration of the Holy Scripture! And yet as they read it 
they know it is evil. But on the day when the Philosopher's word would justify the marginal jests 
of the debauched imagination, or when what has been marginal would leap to the center, every trace 
of the center would be lost. The people of God would be transformed into an assembly of monsters 
belched forth from the abysses of the terra incognita, and at that moment the edge of the known 
world would become the heart of the Christian empire, the Arimaspi on the throne of Peter, Blemmyes 
in the monasteries, dwarfs with huge bellies and immense heads in charge of the library! Servants 
laying down the law, we (but you, too, then) obeying, in the ctbsence of any law. A Greek 
philosopher (whom your Aristotle quotes here, an accomplice and foul auctoritas) said thot the 
seriousness of opponents must be dispelled with laughter, and laughter opposed with seriousness. 
The prudence of our fathers made i†s choice: if laughter is †he deligh† of †he plebeictns, †he 
license of †he plebeictns mus† be restrained and humiliated, and intimidated by sternness. And the 
plebeians have no weapons for refining their laughter until they have made it an instrument against 
the seriousness of the spiritual shepherds who must lead them to eternal life and rescue them from 
the seductions of belly, pudenda, food, †heir sordid desires. Bu† if one dqy somebody, brandishing 
†he words of †he Philosopher and therefore speaking as a philosopher, were to raise the weapon of 
laughter to the condition of subtle weapon, if the rhetoric of conviction were replaced by the 
rhetoric of mockery, if the topics of the patient construction of the images of redemption were to 
be replaced by the topics of the impatient dismantling and upsetting of every holy and venerable 
image—oh, that day even you, William, and all your knowledge, would be swept ctwcty!”

“Why* I would match my wit with the wit of others. It would be a better world than the one where 
the fire and red-hot iron of Bernard Gui humiliate the fire and red-hart iron of Dolcino.”

"You yourself would by then be caught in the Devil‘s plot. You would fight on the other side at the 
field of Armageddon, where the final conflict must take place. But by that day the church must be 
able to impose once again its rule on the conflict. Blasphemy does not frighten us, because even in 
the cursing of God we recognize the deformed image of the wrath of Jehovah, who curses the 
rebellious angels.
We are not afraid of the violence of those who kill the shepherds in the name of some fantasy of 
renewal, because it is the same violence as that of the princes who tried to destroy the people of 
Israel. We are not afraid of the severity of the Donatists, the mad suicide of the Circumcellions, 
the lust of the gogomils, the proud purity of the Albigensians, the flagellonts’ need for blood, 
the evil madness of the Brothers of the Free Spirit. we know them qll and we know the root of their 
sins, which is also †he roo† of our holiness. We are no† afraid, and, obove all, we know how †o 
destroy them—better, how to allow them to destroy themselves, arrogantly carrying to its zenith the 
will to die †ha† is born from †heir own nadir. Indeed, I would say †heir presence is precious †o 
us, i† is inscribed in the plan of God, because their sin prompts our virtue, their cursing 
encourages our hymn of praise, their undisciplined penance regulates our taste for sacrifice, their 
impiety makes our piety shine, just as the Prince of Darkness was necessary, with his rebellion and 
his desperation, to make
†he glory of God shine more radian†Iy, †he beginning and end of all hope. Bu† if one day—and no 
longer


as plebeian exception, but as ascesis of the learned, devoted to the indestructible testimony of 
Scripture—the ar† of mockery were to be made acceptable, and to seem noble and liberal and no 
longer mechanical; if one day someone could say (and be heard), ’I laugh at the Incarnation,’ then 
we would have no weapons to combat that blasphemy, because it would summon the dark powers of 
corporal matter, those that qre affirmed in the fart and the belch, and the fart and the belch 
would claim the right that is only of the spirit, to breathe where they list!”
“Lycurgus had a statue erected to laughter.”
“You read †ha† in †he libellus of Clori†ian, who †ried †o absolve mimes of †he sin of impie†y, and 
†eIls how a sick man was healed by a doctor who helped him laugh. What need was there to heal him, 
if God had established that his earthly day had reached its end*”
“I don't believe the doctor cured him. He taught him to laugh at his illness.” “Illness is not 
exorcised. It is destroyed.”
“With the body of the sick man.” “If necessary.”
“You are the Devil,” William soid then.
Jorge seemed not to understand. If he had been able to see, I would say he stared at his 
interlocutor with a dazed look. “I*” he said.

“Yes. They lied to you. The Devil is not the Prince of Matter: the Devil is the arrogance of the 
spirit, faith without smile, truth that is never seized by doubt. The Devil is grim because he 
knows where he is going, and, in moving, he always returns whence he came. You are the Devil, and 
like the Devil you live in darkness. If you wanted to convince me, you have failed. I hctte you, 
Jorge, and if I could, I would lead you downstairs, across the ground, naked, with fowl‘s feathers 
stuck in your asshole and your face painted like a juggles and a buffoon, so the whole monastery 
would laugh at you and be afraid no longer. I would like to smear honey all over you and then roll 
you in feathers, and take you on a leash to fairs, to say to all: He was announcing the truth to 
you and telling you that the truth has the taste of death, and you believed, not in his words, but 
in his grimness. And now I say to you that, in the infinite whirl of possible things, God allows 
you also to imagine a world where the presumed interpreter of the truth is nothing but a clumsy 
raven, who repeats words learned long ago.”

“You are worse than the Devil, Minorite,” J •9e said. "You are ct clown, like the saint who gave 
birth to you all. You ore like your Francis, who de toto corpore fecerat linguam, who preached 
sermons giving a performance like a mountebank's, who confounded the miser by putting gold pieces 
in his hand, who humiliated the nuns’ devotion by reciting the 'Miserere’ instead of the sermon, 
who begged in French, and imitated with a piece of wood the movements of a violin player, who 
disguised himself as a tramp to confound the gluttonous monks, who flung himself naked in the snow, 
spoke with animals and plants, transformed the very mystery of the Nativity into a village 
spectacle, called the Iamb of Bethlehem



by imitating †he blea† of a sheep. ... I† was a 9 od school. Was †ha† Friar Dio†isalvi of Florence 
no† a Minori†e*”

"Yes.” William smiled. "The one who went to the convent of the preachers and said he would not 
accept food if first they did not give him a piece of Brother John‘s tunic to preserve as a relic, 
and when he was given it he wiped his behind and threw it in the dung-heap and with a stick rolled 
it around in the dung, shouting: Alas, help me, brothers, because I dropped the saint's relic in 
the latrine!”

“This story amuses you, apparently. Perhaps you would like to tell me also the one about thot other 
Minorite Friar Paul Millemosche, who one day fell full length on the ice; when his fellow citizens 
mocked him and one asked him whether he would not like to lie on something better, he said to the 
man: Yes, your wife ... That is how you and your brothers seek the truth.“
“That is how Francis taught people to look at thin9s from another direction."
“But we have disciplined them. You saw them yesterday, your brothers. They hove rejoined our ranks, 
they no longer speak like the simple. The simple must not spectk. This book would have justified 
the ideo that the tongue of the simple is the vehicle of wisdom. This had to be prevented, which I 
hove done. You say I am the Devil, but it is not true: I have been the hand of God.”

"The hand of God creates; i† does no† conceal.“

“There are boundaries beyond which it is not permitted to go. God decreed that certain papers 
should
bear †he words 'hic sun† leones.’ “

“God created the monsters, too. And you. And He wctnts everything to be spoken of."
Jorge reached out his shaking hands and drew the book to him. He held it open but turned it around, 
so that William could still see it in the right position. "Then why," he soid, “did He allow this 
text to be los† over †he course of †he centuries, and only one copy †o be saved, and †he copy of 
†ha† copy, which had ended up God knows where, to remain buried for years in the hands of an 
infidel who knew no Greek, and then to lie abandoned in the secrecy of an old library, where I, not 
you, was called by Providence †o find i† and †o hide i† for more years s†iII* I know, I know as if 
I saw i† wri††en in adamantine letters, with my eyes, which see things you do not see, I know that 
this was the will of the Lord, and I acted, interpreting it. In the name of the Father, of the Son, 
and of the Holy Ghost.”

NIGHT
In which the ecpyrosis takes place, and becouse of excess virtue the forces of hell prevail.
The old man was silent. He held both hands open on the book, as if caressing its pages, flattening 
them the better to read them, or as if he wanted to protect the book from a raptor‘s tolons.

“All of this, in any case, has been to no avail,” William said to him. “Now it is over. I have 
found you, I have found the book, and the others died in vain.“



“Not in vain,” Jorge said. “Perhaps there were too many of them. And if you needed proof thot this 
book is accursed, you have had it. And to ensure they have not died in vain, one more death will 
not be
†oo many.”

He spoke, and with his fleshless, diaphanous hands he began slowly tearing to strips and shreds the 
limp pages of the manuscript, stuffing them into his mouth, slowly swallowing as if he were 
consuming the host and he wanted to make it flesh of his flesh.

William looked at him, fascinated, and seemed not to grasp what was happening. Then he recovered 
himself and leaned forward, shouting, “What are you doing*” Jorge smiled, baring his bloodless 
gums, as a yellowish slime trickled from his pale lips over the sparse white hairs on his chin.

“You were awaiting the sound of the seventh trumpet, were you not* Now listen to what the voice 
says: Seol what the seven thunders have said and do not write it, take and devour it, it will make 
bitter your belly but to your lips it will be sweet as honey. You see* Now I seal thot which was 
not to be said, in †he grqve I become.”

He laughed, he, Jorge. For the first time I heard him laugh.  He laughed with his throat, though 
his
lips did not assume the shape of gaiety, and he seemed almost to be weeping. “You did not expect 
it, William, no† †his conclusion, did you* This old man, by †he grace of God, wins once more, does 
he no†*” And os William †ried †o †oke †he book oway from him, Jorge, who sensed †he movemen†, 
feeling †he vibration of the air, drew back, clasping the volume to his chest with his left hand 
while his right went on tearing the pages and cramming them into his mouth.

He was on the other side of the tqble, and William, who could not reqch him, tried abruptly to move 
around †he obstacle. Bu† he knocked over his s†ooI, catching his habi† in i†, so †ha† Jorge was 
able †o perceive the disturbance. The old man laughed again, louder this time, and with unexpected 
rapidity thrust out his right hand, groping for the lomp. Guided by the heat, he reached the flame 
and pressed his hand over it, unafraid of pain, and the light went out. The room was plunged into 
darkness, and for
†he los† †ime we heard †he laughter of Jorge, who said, “Find me now! Now I om †he one who sees 
best!” Then he was silent and did not make another sound, moving with those silent footsteps that 
always made his appearances so unexpected; and we heard only, from time to time, in different parts 
of the room, the sound of the tearing paper.

“Adso!” William cried. “Stay by the door. Don't let him go out!”

But he had spoken too late, because I, who for some moments had been yearning to fling myself on 
the old man, had jumped forward when the darkness fell, tryin9to Circle the tqble on the side 
opposite the one around which my master had moved. Too late I realized I had enabled Jorge to gain 
the door, because the old man could move in the dark with extraordinary confidence. We heard a 
sound of
tearing paper behind us—somewhat muffled, because it came from the next room. And at the same time 
we heard another sound, a harsh, progressive creaking, the groan of hinges.

“The mirror!” William cried. “He is shutting us inside!” Led by the sound, we both rushed toward 
the entrance; I stumbled over a stool and bruised my leg but paid no heed, because in a flash I 
realized


thot if Jorge shut us in we would never 9et out. in the darkness we would never find the way to 
open
†he door, no† knowing wha† had †o be moneuvered on †his side, or how.

I believe William moved with the same desperation as I did, because I felt him beside me as both of 
us, reaching the threshold, pressed ourselves against the back of the mirror, which was closing 
toward, us. We arrived in time; the door stopped, then gave way and reopened. Obviously Jorge, 
sensing the conflict was unequal, had left. We came out of the accursed room, but now we had no 
idea where the old man was heading, and the darkness was still complete.
All of a sudden I remembered: “Master! I have the flint with me!”
“What are you waiting for, then*” William cried. “Find the lamp and light it!” I rushed back in the 
darkness, into the finis Africae, groping for the lamp. I found it at once, by divine miracle, then 
dug inside my scapular and pulled out the flint. My hands were trembling, and two or three times I 
failed before I was able to light it, as William gasped at the door, “Hurry, hurry!” Finally I made 
a light.
“Hurry!” William urged me qgain. “Otherwise the old man will eat up all of Aristotle!” “And die!” I 
cried in anguish, overtaking him and joining in the search.
“I don't care whether he dies, damn the monster!” William cried, peering in every direction, moving 
at random. “With what he has eoten, his fate is already sealed. But I want the book!”

Then he stopped and added, more calmly, “Wait. If we continue like this, we‘ll never find him. 
Hush: we‘ll remain still for a moment.” We stiffened, in silence. And in the silence we heard, not 
for away, the sound of ct body bumping into ct cctse, ctnd the racket of some falling books. “That 
way!” we shouted,
†oge†her.
We ran in the direction of the noise, but soon realized we would hove to slow our pace. In fact, 
outside the finis Africqe, the library wqs filled thot evening with gusts of air thqt hissed and 
moqned, in proportion to the strong wind outside. Heightened by our speed, they threatened to put 
out our light, so painfully recovered. Since we could not move faster, we would have to make Jorge 
move more slowly. But William had just the opposite idea and shouted, “We‘ve caught you, old man; 
now we have light!” And it was a wise decision, becouse the revelation probably upset Jorge, who 
moved faster, compromising his magic sensibility, his gift for seeing in the darkness. Soon we 
heard another noise, and, following it, when we entered room Y of YSPANIA, we saw him lying on the 
floor, the book still in his hands, as he attempted to pull himself to his feet among the books 
that had spilled from the table he had struck and overturned. He was trying to stand, but he went 
on tearing the pages, determined to devour his prey as quickly as possible.

By the time we overtook him he was on his feet; sensing our presence, he confronted us, moving 
backward. His face, in the reddish glow of the lamp, now seemed horrible to us: the features were 
distorted, a malignant sweat streaked his brow and cheeks, his eyes, usually a deathly white, were 
bloodshot, from his mouth came scraps of parchment, and he looked like a ravening beast who had 
stuffed himself and could no longer swallow his food. Disfigured by anxiety, by the menace of the 
poison now flowing abundantly through his veins, by his desperate and diabolical de†ermina†ion, †he



venerctble figure of †he old man now seemed dis9Ustingand grotesque. A† o†her moments he mi9h† hove 
inspired laughter, bu† we, too, were reduced to the condition of animals, dogs stalking their 
quarry.

We could have tqken him calmly, but we fell on him with violence; he writhed, clasped his hands on 
his chest to defend the volume; I grasped him with my left hand while with my right I tried to hold 
the lamp high, but I grazed his face with the flame, he sensed the heat, let out a muffled cry, 
almost a roar, as bits of paper spilled from his mouth, and his right hand let go of the volume, 
darted toward the lomp, ond abruptly tore it from me, flinging it away.

The lamp fell right on the pile of books that had been knocked from the table all in a heap, lying 
open. The oil spilled out, the fire immediately seized a fragile parchment, which blazed up like a 
bundle of dry twigs. Everything happened in a few moments, as if for centuries those ancient pages 
had been yearning for arson and were rejoicin9 F'l the sudden satisfaction of an immemorial thirst 
for ecpyrosis. William realized what was happening and let go of the old mon, who, feeling himself 
free, stepped back a few paces. William hesitated an instant, most likely too long, uncertain 
whether to seize Jorge again or to hasten to put out the little pyre. One book, older than the 
others, burned almost immediately, sending up a tongue of flame.
The fine gusts of the wind, which might have extinguished a weak flicker, encouraged the stronger, 
livelier flame, and even carried sparks flying from it.

“Put out that fire! Quickly!“ William cried. “Everything will burn up!“

I rushed toward the blaze, then stopped, because I was unsure what to do. William again moved after 
me, to come to my aid. We held out our hands es our eyes sought something to smother the fire. I 
had a flash of inspiration: I slipped my habit over my head and tried to throw it on the heart of 
the fire. But the flames by now were too high; they consumed my garment and were nourished by it. 
Snatching back my scorched hands, I turned toward William and saw Jorge, who had approached again, 
directly behind him. The heat wets now so strong thctt the old man could feel it very easily, so he 
knew with absolute certainty where the fire was: he flung the Aristotle into it.

In an explosion of ire, William gave the old man a violent push. Jorge slammed into a case, banging 
his head against one corner. He fell to the ground.  But William, whom I believe I heard utter a 
horrible
curse, paid no heed to him. He turned to the books. Too Ictte. The Aristotle, or what had remained 
of it af†er †he old man‘s meal, was already burning.
Meanwhile, some sporks had flown toword the wolls, and olready the volumes of another bookcase were 
crumpling in the fury of the fire. By now, not one but two fires were burning in the room.

William, realizing we would not be able to put them out with our hands, decided to use books to 
save books. He seized a volume that seemed to him more stoutly bound than the others, more compact, 
and he tried to use it as a weapon to stifle the hostile element. But, slamming the studded binding 
on the pyre of glowing books, he merely stirred more sparks. Though he tried to scatter them with 
his feet, he achieved the opposite effect: fluttering scraps of parchment, half burned, rose and 
hovered like


bats, while the air, allied with its qiry fellow element, sent them to kindle the terrestrial 
matter of further pages.

As misfortune would have it, this was one of the most untidy rooms of the labyrinth. Rolled-up 
manuscripts hung from the shelves; other books, falling apqrt, let pages slip from their covers, qs 
from gaping mouths, tongues of vellum dried up by the years; and the table must have held a great 
number of writings that Malachi (by then unassisted for some days) had neglected to put back in 
their places. So †he room, af†er †he spill Jorge caused, was invaded by parchments waiting only †o 
be transformed into onother element.

In no †ime †he place was a brazier, a burning bush. The bookcases themselves also joined in †his 
sacrifice and were beginning to crackle. I realized the whole labyrinth was nothing but on immense 
sacrificial pyre, all prepared for the first spark.

“Water. We need water!” William was saying, but then he added, “But where can any water be found in 
this inferno*”

“In the kitchen, down in the kitchen!” I cried.

William looked at me, puzzled, his face flushed by that raging glow. “Yes, but by the time we've 
gone down and come back up ... The Devil tqke it!” he then cried. “This room is lost, in any cqse, 
and perhaps the next one os well. Let‘s go down at once. I‘ll find woter, and you rush out to give 
the alarm. We need a lot of people!”

We found the way toward the stairs: the conflagration lighted the subsequent rooms as well, but 
more and more fctintly, so we crossed the last two almost groping agqin. Below, the moon dimly 
illuminated
†he scrip†orium, and from †here we wen† down †o †he refectory. William rushed in†o †he kitchen: I 
†o the refectory door, fumbling to open it from the inside. I succeeded after a fair amount of 
labor, for my agitation mode me clumsy and inept. I stepped out onto the grass, ran toward the 
dormitory, then realized I could no† wake †he monks one by one. I hctd an inspirct†ion: I wen† in†o 
†he church, hunting for the access to the bell tower. When I found it, I grabbed all the ropes, 
ringing the alarm. I pulled hard, and the central bell rope, as it rose, drew me up with it. In the 
library the backs of my hands had been burned. My palms were still unhurt, but now I burned them, 
too, letting them slip along the ropes until they bled and I had to let go.

By then, however, I had made enough noise. I rushed outside in time to see the first monks coming 
from the dormitory, as I heard in the distance the voices of the servants, who were appearing at 
the doors of their lodgings. I could not explain myself clearly, becouse I was unable to formulate 
words, and the first that cqme to my lips were in my mother tongue. With bleeding hand I pointed to 
the windows of the south wing of the Aedificium, at whose alabaster panes there was an abnormal 
glow. I realized, from the intensity of the light, that the fire had spread to other rooms while I 
had come down and rung the bells. All the windows of Africa and the whole fasade between it and the 
east tower now flickered with irregular flashes.
“Water! Fetch water!” I shouted.


At first no one understood. The monks were so used to considering the library a sacred and 
inaccessible ploce †ha† †hey could no† understand i† was †hrea†ened by †he sor† of banal acciden† 
†ha† might have befallen a peasant hut. The first who looked up at the windows blessed themselves, 
murmuring words of fear, and I realized †hey were thinking of further apparitions. I grabbed †heir 
clothing and begged †hem to understand, un†iI someone finally †ransla†ed my sobs in†o human words.

It was Nicholas of Morimondo, who said, “The library is on fire!”

“It is, indeed,” I whispered, sinking to the ground, exhausted.

Nicholas displayed great energy, shouted orders to the servants, gave advice to the monks 
surrounding him, sent some to open the other doors of the Aedificium, others to seek water and 
vessels of every kind. He directed those present toward the wells ond the woter tanks of the obbey. 
He ordered the cowherds to use the mules and asses to transport jars.  If a man invested with
authority had given these orders, he would hove been obeyed at once. But the servants were 
accustomed to taking orders from Remigio, the scribes from Malachi, all of them from the abbot. 
And, alqs, none of those three wqs present. The monks looked qround for the abbot, to ask 
instructions qnd solace, and did not find him: only I knew that he was dead, or dying, at that 
moment, shut up in an airless passage that was now turning into an oven, a bull of Phalaris.

Nicholas shoved †he cowherds in one direction, bu† some o†her monks, wi†h †he bes† of in†en†ions, 
pushed them in another. Some of the brothers had obviously lost their heods, others were still 
dazed with sleep. I tried to explain, now that I had recovered the power of speech, but it must be 
remembered that I was almost naked, having thrown my habit on the flames, and the sight of a boy, 
as I was †hen, bleeding, his face smudged by soo†, his body indecently hoirless, numbed now by †he 
cold, surely did not inspire much confidence.

Finally Nicholas managed to drag a few brothers and some other men into the kitchen, which in the 
meantime someone had opened. Another monk had the good sense to bring some torches. We found the 
plqce in great disorder, and I realized William must have turned it upside down, seeking wqter qnd 
vessels to carry it.

At that point I saw William himself appear from the door of the refectory, his face singed, his 
habit smoking. He was carrying a large pot in his hand, and I felt pity for him, pathetic allegory 
of helplessness. I realized that even if he had succeeded in carryin9 a pan of water to the second 
floor without spilling it, and even if he had done so more than once, he could have achieved very 
little. I recalled the story of Saint Augustine, when he saw a boy trying to scoop up the water of 
the sea with a spoon: the boy was an angel and did this to make fun of a saint who wanted to 
understand the mysteries of the divine nature. And, like the angel, William spoke to me, leaning in 
exhaustion ctgainst the doorjamb: “I† is impossible, we will never do i†, no† even with all the 
monks of the abbey. The library is lost.” Unlike the angel, William wept.

I hugged him, as he tore a cloth from o table and tried to cover me. We stopped and, finally 
defeoted, observed what was going on around us.


There wets. a confused bustle, people going up the spiral stctircase bctre-handed and encountering 
o†hers, bore-handed, who had been driven upstairs by †heir curiosity and were now coming down †o 
look for vessels. Others, cleverer, had immediately started hunting for pans and basins, only to 
realize there was not sufficient water in the kitchen. Suddenly the great room was invaded by 
mules, bearing huge jars, and the cowherds driving the animals unloaded them and started to carry 
up the water. But
†hey did no† know how †o climb †o †he scrip†orium, and i† was a while before some of †he scribes 
†oId them, and when they went up they bumped into others rushing down, terrified. jars broke and 
the water spread over the ground, though other jars were passed up the stairs by willing hands. I 
followed the group and found myself in the scrip†orium. Thick smoke come from the access to the 
library; the last men who had tried to go up to the east tower were already coming down, 
coughin9,red-eyed, and they announced it was no longer possible to penetrate that hell.
Then I saw Benno. His face distorted, he was coming up from the lower floor with an enormous 
vessel. He heard what those coming down were saying and he attacked them: “Hell will swallow you 
all, cowards!” He turned, as if seeking help, ond sow me. “Adso,” he cried, “the library ... the 
library ...” He did not await my answer, but ran to the foot of the stairs and boldly plunged into 
the smoke. That was the lqst time I saw him.

I heard a creaking sound from above. Bits of stone mixed with mortar were falling from the ceiling 
of the scriptorium. The keystone of a vault, carved in the shape of a flower, came loose and almost 
landed on my head. The floor of the labyrinth was giving way.

I rushed downstairs and out into the open air. Some willing servants had brought ladders, with 
which they were trying to reach the windows of the upper floors, to take water up that way. But the 
highest ladders barely extended to the windows of the scriptorium, and those who had climbed up 
were unable to open them from the outside. They sent word down to have them opened from within, but 
at this point nobody dared try to go up there.

Meanwhile, I was looking at the windows of the top floor. The whole library by now must have become 
a single smoking brctzier as the fire raced from room to room, spreading rctpidly among the 
thousands of dry pages. All the windows were alight, a black smoke came from the roof: the fire had 
already spread to the beams. The Aedificium, which had seemed so solid and tetragonous, revealed in 
these circumstances its weakness, its cracks, the walls corroded from within, the crumbling stones 
allowing the flames to reach the wooden elements wherever they were.

Suddenly some windows shattered as if pressed by an inner force, the sparks flew out into the open 
air, dotting with fluttering glints the darkness of the night. The strong wind had become lighter: 
a misfortune, because, strong, it might have blown out the sparks, but light, it carried them, 
stimulating them, and with them made scraps of parchment swirl in the air, the delicctte fragments 
of an inner torch. At that point on explosion was heard: the floor of the labyrinth had given way 
at some point and its blazing beams must have plunged to the floor below. Now I saw tongues of 
flame rise from the scriptorium, which was also tenanted by books and cases, and by loose papers, 
spread on the desks, ready to provoke the sparks. I heard cries of woe from a group of scribes who 
tore their hair and still
†hough† of climbing up heroically, †o recover †heir beloved parchments. In vain: †he kitchen and 
refectory were now a crossroads of lost souls, rushing in all directions, each hindering the 
others. People bumped into one another, fell down; those carrying vessels spilled their redemptive 
contents;


the mules brought into the kitchen had sensed the presence of fire and, with a clatter of hoofs, 
dashed toward the exits, knocking down the human beings and even their own terrified grooms. It was 
obvious, in any case, that this horde of villeins and of devout, wise, but unskilled men, with no 
one in command, was blocking even what aid might still have arrived.

The whole obbey was in the grip of disorder; bu† this was only the beginning of the tragedy. 
Pouring from the windows and the roof, the triumphant cloud of sparks, fostered by the wind, was 
now descending on all sides, touching †he roof of †he church. Everyone knows how †he mos† splendid 
cathedrals are vulnerable to the sting of fire: the house of God appears beautiful and well 
defended as the heavenly Jerusalem itself thanks to the stone it proudly displays, but the walls 
and ceilings are supported by a fragile, if admirable, architecture of wood, and if the church of 
stone recalls the most venerable forests with its columns rising high, bold as oaks, to the vaults 
of the ceilings, these columns often have cores of oak—and many of the trappings are also of wood: 
the altars, the choirs, the painted panels, the benches, the stalls, the candelabra. And so it was 
with the abbatial church, whose beautiful door had so fascinated me on the first day. The church 
caught fire in no time. The monks and the whole population of the place then understood that the 
very survival of the abbey was at stctke, and ctll begctn rushing even more earnestly, and in even 
grectter confusion, to deal with the new danger.

To be sure, the church was more accessible, more easily defended than the library. The library had 
been doomed by its own impenetrability, by the mystery that protected it, by its few entrances. The 
church, ma†ernalIy open †o all in †he hour of prayer, was open †o all in †he hour of succor. Bu† 
†here was no more water, or at least very little could be found stored, and the wells supplied it 
with natural parsimony and at a slow pace that did not correspond to the urgency of the need. All 
the monks would hove liked to put out the fire of the church, but nobody knew how at this po int. 
Moreover, the fire was spreading from qbove, and it was difficult to hoist men up to beat on the 
flames or smother them with dirt or rags. And when the flames arrived from below, it was futile by 
then to throw earth or sand on them, for the ceiling was crashing down on the firefighters, 
striking more than a few of them.

And so the cries of regret for the mqny riches burned were now joined by the cries of pain at 
seared faces, crushed limbs, bodies buried under a sudden collapse of the high vaults.

The wind had become furious again, and more furiously helped spread the fire. Immediately after the 
church, the barns and stables caugh† fire. The terrified animals broke their halters, kicked down 
the doors, scattered over the 9• UFIds,neighin9,•  iFIg, bleating, grunting horribly. Sparks caught 
the manes of many horses, and there were infernal creatures racing across the grass, flaming steeds 
that trampled everything in their path, without goal or respite. I saw old Alinardo wandering 
around, not
understanding what was happening, knocked down by the magnificent Brunellus, haloed by fire: the 
old man was dragged in the dust, then abandoned there, a poor shapeless object. But I had neither 
means nor time to succor him, or to bemoan his end, because similar scenes were taking place 
everywhere.
The horses in flames had carried the fire to places where the wind had not yet brought it: now the 
forges were burning, and the novices' house. Hordes of people were running from one end of the 
compound †o another, for no purpose or for illusory purposes. I saw Nicholos, his head wounded, his 
habit in shreds, now defeated, kneeling in the path from the gate, cursing the divine curse. I saw 
Pacificus of Tivoli, who, abandoning all notion of help, was trying to seize a crazed mule as it 
passed;


when he succeeded, he shouted to me to do the same and to flee, to escape that horrid replicct of
Armageddon.

I wondered where William was, fearing he had been trapped under some collapsing wall. I found him, 
after a long search, near the cloister. In his hand he had his traveling sack: when the fire was 
already spreading to the pilgrims' hospice, he hod gone up to his cell to save at least his most 
precious belongings. He had collected my sack, too, and in it I found something to put on. We 
paused, breathless, to watch what was happening around us.

By now the abbey was doomed. Almost all its buildings, some more, some less, had been reached by 
the fire. Those still intact would not remain so for long, because everything, from the natural 
elements to the confused work of the rescuers, was now contributing to the spread of the fire. Only 
the ports without buildings remained safe, the vegetable patch, the garden outside the cloister.  
Nothing more
could be done to save the buildings; abandoning the idea of saving them, we were able to observe 
everything without danger, standing in an open space.

We looked a† †he church, now burning slowly, for i† is charctc†eris†ic of †hese great† 
cons†ruc†ions †o blaze up quickly in †heir wooden par†s and †hen †o agonize for hours, sometimes 
for days. The conflagration of the Aedificium was different. Here inflammable material was much 
more abundant, and the fire, having spread all through the scriptorium, had invaded the kitchen 
floor. As for the top floor, where once, and for hundreds of years, there had been the labyrinth, 
it was now virtually destroyed.

"It was the greatest library in Christendom,“ William said. "Now,” he added, “the Antichrist is 
truly at hond, because no learning will hinder him any more. For †ho† mo††er, we have seen his foce 
†onigh†.“

"Whose face*" I asked, dazed.

“Jorge, I mean. In that foce, deformed by hotred of philosophy, I saw for the first time the 
portrait of the Antichrist, who does not come from the tribe of Judas, qs his heralds have it, or 
from a fqr country. The An†ichris† can be born from pie†y i†seIf, from excessive love of God or of 
†he †ru†h, as the heretic is born from the saint and the possessed from the seer. Fear prophets, 
Adso, and those prepared to die for the truth, for as a rule they make many others die with them, 
often before them, at times instead of them. Jorge did a diabolical thing because he loved his 
truth so lewdly that he dared anything in order to destroy falsehood. Jorge feqred the second book 
of Aristotle because it perhaps really did teach how to distort the face of every truth, so that we 
would not become slaves of our ghosts. Perhaps the mission of those who love mankind is to make 
people laugh at the truth, to make truth laugh, becouse the only truth lies in leorning to free 
ourselves from insane passion for the truth."

"But, master," I ventured, sorrowfully, “you speak like this now because you are wounded in the 
depths of your spiri†. There is one †ru†h, however, †ha† you discovered †onigh†, †he one you 
reached by interpreting the clues you read over the post few days. Jorge has won, but you hove 
defeated Jorge because you exposed his plo†.  ”

"There was no plo†,” William said, "and I discovered i† by mistake.”




The assertion was self-contradictory, and I couldn't decide whether William really wanted it to be. 
“But it was true that the tracks in the snow led to Brunellus,” I said, “it was true that Adelmo 
committed suicide, it was true that Venantius did not drown in the jar, it was true that the 
labyrinth was laid out the way you imagined it, it was true thqt one entered the finis Africae by 
touching the word 'quatuor,’ it was true that the mysterious book was by Aristotle.  I could go on 
listing all the
true things you discovered with the help of your learning ”

“I hove never doubted the truth of signs, Adso; they are the only thins man has with which to 
orient himself in the world. What I did not understand was the relation among signs. I arrived at 
Jorge through an apocalyptic pattern that seemed to underlie all the crimes, and yet it was 
accidental. I arrived at Jorge seeking one criminal for all the crimes and we discovered that each 
crime was committed by a different person, or by no one. I arrived at Jorge pursuing the plan of a 
perverse and rational mind, and there was no plan, or, rather, Jorge himself was overcome by his 
own initial design and there began a sequence of causes, and concauses, and of causes contradicting 
one another, which proceeded on their own, creating relations thot did not stem from any plan. 
Where is all my wisdom, then* I behaved, stubbornly, pursuing a semblance of order, when I should 
have known well thctt there is no order in the universe.”
“But in imagining an erroneous order you still found something. ”
“What you say is very fine, Adso, and I thank you. The order that our mind imagines is like a net, 
or like a ladder, built to attain something. But afterward you must throw the ladder away, because 
you discover that, even if it was useful, it was meaningless. Er muoz gelichesame die leiter 
abewerfen, so er an ir ufgestigen.  Is that how you say it*”
“That is how it is said in my language. Who told you that*”
“A mystic from your land. He wrote it somewhere, I forget where. And it is not necessary for 
somebody one day to find thctt manuscript agqin. The only truths thctt ctre useful ctre instruments 
to be thrown awoy.”

“You have no reason to reproach yourself: you did your best.”

“A human best, which is very little. It's hard to accept the idea that there cannot be an order in 
the universe because it would offend the free will of God and His omnipotence. So the freedom of 
God is our condemnation, or at least the condemnation of our pride.”
I dared, for the first qnd last time in my life, to express a theological conclusion. “But how can 
a necessary being exis† †o†aIly polluted wi†h †he possible* Who† difference is †here, †hen, between 
God and primigenial chaos* Isn't affirming God‘s absolute omnipotence and His absolute freedom with 
regard to His own choices tantamount to demonstrating that God does not exist*”
William looked at me without betraying any feeling in his features, and he soid, “How could a 
learned man go on communicating his learning if he answered yes to your question*”


I did not understand the meaning of his words. “Do you mean,” I asked, “thqt there would be no 
possible and communicable learning any more if the very criterion of truth were lacking, or do you 
mean you could no longer communicate what you know because others would not allow you to*”

A† †ha† momen† a section of †he dormitory roof collapsed wi†h a huge din, blowing q cloud of sparks 
into the sky. Some of the sheep and the goats wandering through the grounds went past us, bleating 
horribly. A group of servants also went by us, shouting, nearly knocking us down.
“There is too much confusion here,” William said. “Non in commotione, non in commotione Dominus.”

LAST PAGE
The Abbey burned for three days and three nights, and the last efforts were of no avail. As early 
as thot morning of the seventh day of our sojourn in that place, when the survivors were fully 
aware that no building could be saved, when the finest constructions showed only their ruined outer 
walls, and the church, cts if drawing into itself, swctllowed its tower—even at that point 
everyone's will to combctt the divine chastisement failed. The rush for the last few buckets of 
water grew more and more listless, while the chapter house and the superb apartments of the abbot 
were still burning. By the time the fire reached the far side of the various workshops, the 
servants had long since saved as many objects as they could, and had chosen to beat the countryside 
to recapture at least some of the livestock, which had fled beyond the walls in the confusion of 
the night.

I saw some of the servants venture into what remained of the church: I presumed they were trying to 
get into the crypt to seize some precious object before running away. I do not know whether they 
succeeded, whether the crypt had not alrectdy collapsed, whether the louts did not sink into the 
bowels of the earth in their attempt to reach the treasure.

Meanwhile, men were coming up from the village to lend a hond or to try to snatch some further 
booty. The dead for the most part remained among the ruins, which were still red-hot. On the third 
day, when the wounded had been treated and the corpses found outside had been buried, the monks and 
all the others collected their belongings and abandoned the still-smoking abbey, as a place 
accursed. They scattered, I do not know whereto.

William and I left those pctrts on two horses we found astray in the wood: we considered them res 
nullius by now. We headed east. When we reached Bobbio again, we began to receive bad news of the 
Emperor. On arriving in Rome, he had been crowned by the people. Considering any agreement with 
John now impossible, he had chosen an an†ipope, Nicholas V Morsilius had been named spiritual vicar 
of Rome, but throu9h his fault, or his weakness, things very sctd to report were taking place in 
that city.
Priests loyal to the Pope and unwilling to say Mass were tortured, an Augustinian prior had been
thrown into the lions' pit on the Capitoline. Marsilius and John of Jandun had declared John a 
heretic, and Louis had had him sentenced to death. But the Emperor's misrule was antagonizing the 
local lords and depleting public funds. Gradually, as we heard this news, we delayed our descent to 
Rome, and I realized that William did not want to find himself witnessing events that would dash 
his hopes.


When we cqme to Pomposa, we learned that Rome had rebelled against Louis, who had moved back up 
toward Pisa, while John's legates were triumphantly entering the papal city.

Meanwhile, Michael of Cesena had realized that his presence in Avignon was producing no results— 
indeed, he feared for his life—so he had fled, joining Louis in Pisa.

Soon, foreseeing events and learning that the Bavarian would move on to Munich, we reversed our 
route and decided to proceed there, also because William sensed that Italy was becoming unsafe for 
him. In the ensuing months and years, Louis saw the alliance of his supporters, the Ghibelline 
lords, dissolve; and the following year the Antipope Nicholas was to surrender to John, presenting 
himself with a rope around his neck.

When we come to Munich, I had to take leave of my good master, amid many tears. His destiny was 
uncertain, and my family preferred for me to return to Melk. After that tragic night when William 
revealed †o me his dismay before †he ruins of †he obbey, as if by †aci† agreemen† we had no† spoken 
again of that story. Nor did we mention it in the course of our sorrowful farewell.

My master gave me much good advice about my future studies, and presented me with the glasses 
Nicholas had made for him, since he had his own back again. I was still young, he said to me, but 
one day they would come in handy (and, truly, I am wearing them on my nose now, as I write these 
lines). Then he embraced me with a father's tenderness and dismissed me.

I never saw him. again. I learned much later that he had died during he great plague that raged 
through Europe toward the middle of this century. I pray always that God received his soul and 
forgave him the many octs of pride that his intellectual vanity had made him commit.

Years later, as a grown man, I had occasion to make a journey to Italy, sen† by my abbo†. I could 
no† resist temptation, and on my return I went far out of my way to revisit what remained of the 
abbey.
The two villages on the slopes of the mountain were deserted, the lqnds qround them uncultivqted. 
When I climbed up †o †he †op, a spectacle of desolation and deo†h appeared before my eyes, which 
moistened wi†h †ears.

Of the great and magnificent constructions that once adorned that place, only scattered ruins 
remained, as hqd happened before with the monuments of the ancient pa9•F'l* iFl the city of Rome. 
Ivy covered the shreds of walls, columns, the few architraves still intact. Weeds invaded the 
ground on all sides, and there was no telling where the vegetables and the flowers had once grown. 
Only the location of the cemetery was recognizable, because of some graves that still rose obove 
the level of the terrain. Sole sign of life, some birds of prey hunted lizards and serpents that, 
like basilisks, slithered among the stones or crawled over the walls. Of the church door only a few 
traces remained, eroded by mold. Half of the tympanum survived, and I still glimpsed there, dilated 
by the elements and dulled by lichens, the left eye of the enthroned Christ, and something of the 
lion's face.
The Aedificium, except for the south wall, which was in ruins, seemed yet to stand and defy the 
course of time. The two outer towers, over the cliff, appeared almost untouched, but all the 
windows were empty sockets whose slimy tears were rotting vines. Inside, the work of art, 
destroyed, became


confused with the work of nature, ctnd across vast stretches of the kitchen the eye rctn to the 
open heavens through the breach of the upper floors and the roof, fallen like fallen angels. 
Everything that was not green with moss was still black from the smoke of so many decades ago.

Poking abou† in the rubble, I found q† †imes scraps of parchmen† †ha† had drifted down from †he 
scriptorium and the library and had survived like treasures buried in the earth; I began to collect 
them, as if I were going to piece together the torn pages of a book. Then I noticed that in one of 
the towers there rose, tottering but still intact, a circular staircase to the scriptorium, and 
from there, by climbing a sloping bit of the ruin, I could reach the level of the library: which, 
however, was only a sort of gallery next to the outside walls, looking down into the void at every 
point.

Along one stretch of wall I found a bookcase, still miraculously erect, having come through the 
fire I cannot say how; it was rotted by water and consumed by termites. In it there were still a 
few pages. Other remnants I found by rummaging in the ruins below. Mine was a poor harvest, but I 
spent a whole day reaping i†, as if from †hose disiec†a membro of †he library a message migh† reach 
me. Some fragments of parchment had faded, others permitted the glimpse of an image's shadow, or 
the ghost of one or more words. A† †imes I found pages where whole sentences were legible; more 
of†en, in†ac† bindings, protected by what had once been metal studs. ... Ghosts of books, 
apparently intact on the outside bu† consumed wi†hin; ye† sometimes a half page had been saved, an 
incipi† was discernible, a title.

I collected every relic I could find, f illing †wo traveling sacks wi†h †hem, abandoning †hings 
useful †o me in order †o save †ha† miserable hoard.

Along the return journey and afterward at Melk, I spent many, many hours trying to decipher those 
remains. Often from a word or a surviving imqge I could recognize whqt the work had been. When I 
found, in time, other copies of those books, I studied them with love, as if destiny hod left me 
this bequest, as if having identified the destroyed copy were a clear sign from heaven that said to 
me: Tolle et lege. At the end of my patient reconstruction, I had before me a kind of lesser 
librory, a symbol of the greater, vanished one: q library made up of fragments, quotations, 
unfinished sentences, ampu†a†ed s†umps of books.

The more I reread this list the more I am convinced it is the result of chance and contains no 
message. But these incomplete pages have accompanied me through all the life that has been left me 
to live since them I hctve often consulted them like on oracle, and I have almost hctd the 
impression that what I have written on these pages, which you will now read, unknown reader, is 
only a cento, a figured hymn, an immense acrostic that says and repeats nothing but what those 
fragments have suggested to me, nor do I know whether thus far I have been speaking of them or they 
have spoken through my mouth. But whichever of the two possibilities may be correct, the more I 
repeat to myself the story that has emerged from them, the less I manage to understand whether in 
it there is a design that goes beyond the natural sequence of the events and the times that connect 
them. And it is a hard thing for this old monk, on the threshold of death, not to know whether the 
letter he has written contains some hidden meaning, or more than one, or many, or none at all.

But this inability of mine to see is perhaps the effect of the shadow that the great darkness, as 
it approaches, is casting on the aged world.



Est ubi gloria nunc Babyloniae* Where are the snows of yesteryear* The earth is dancing the dance 
of Macabré; at times it seems to me that the Danube is crowded with ships loaded with fools going 
toward a dark place.

All I con do now is be silent. O quom salubre, quam iucundum et suave est sedere in solitudine et 
tacere et loqui cum Deo! Soon I shall be joined with my beginning, and I no longer believe that it 
is the God of glory of whom †he abbo†s of my order spoke †o me, or of boy, as †he Minorites 
believed in †hose days, perhaps not even of piety. Gott ist ein lauter Nichts, ihn ruhrt kein Nun 
noch Hier.  I shall soon enter
this broad desert, perfectly level and boundless, where the truly pious heart succumbs in bliss. I 
shall sink into the divine shadow, in a dumb silence and an ineffable union, and in this sinking 
all equality and all inequality shall be los†, and in †ha† abyss my spiri† will lose itself, and 
will no† know the equal or the unequal, or anything else: and all differences will be forgotten. I 
shall be in the simple foundation, in the silent desert where diversity is never seen, in the 
privacy where no one finds himself in his proper place. I shall fall into the silent and 
uninhabited divinity where there is no work and no image.

I† is cold in †he scrip†orium, my †humb aches. I leqve †his mqnuscrip†, I do no† know for whom: I 
no longer know wha† i† is abou†: s†o† rosa pris†ina nomine, nomina nuda †enemus.
